## ML-Enabled Systems Model Deployment and Monitoring: Status Quo and Problems

Eduardo Zimelewicz 1 , Marcos Kalinowski 1 ,  Daniel Mendez 2 , 9 ,  G¨ orkem Giray 3 , Antonio Pedro Santos Alves 1 , Niklas Lavesson 2 , Kelly Azevedo 1 , Hugo Villamizar 1 , Tatiana Escovedo 1 , Helio Lopes 1 , Stefan Biffl 4 , Juergen Musil 4 , Michael Felderer 5 , 6 , Stefan Wagner 7 , Teresa  Baldassarre 8 , and Tony Gorschek 2 , 9

1

Pontifical  Catholic  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  (PUC-Rio),  Brazil

- 2 Blekinge Institute of Technology (BTH), Sweden
- 3 Independent  Researcher,  Turkey
- 4 Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien), Austria
- 5 German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany
- 6 University of Cologne, Germany
- 7 University of Stuttgart, Germany
- 8 University of Bari, Italy
- 9 fortiss GmbH, Germany

Abstract. [Context]  Systems  that  incorporate  Machine  Learning  (ML) models, often referred to as ML-enabled systems, have become commonplace. However, empirical evidence on how ML-enabled systems are engineered in practice is still  limited; this  is especially true for  activities surrounding ML model dissemination. [Goal] We investigate contemporary industrial practices and problems related to ML model dissemination, focusing on the model deployment and the monitoring ML life cycle phases. [Method] We conducted an international survey to gather practitioner insights on how ML-enabled systems are engineered. We gathered a total of 188 complete responses from 25 countries. We analyze the status quo and problems reported for the model deployment and monitoring phases. We analyzed contemporary practices using bootstrapping with confidence intervals and conducted qualitative analyses on the reported problems applying open and axial coding procedures. [Results] Practitioners perceive the model deployment and monitoring phases as relevant and difficult. With respect to model deployment, models are typically deployed as separate services, with limited adoption of MLOps principles. Reported problems include difficulties in designing the architecture of the infrastructure for production deployment and legacy application integration. Concerning model monitoring, many models in production are not monitored. The main monitored aspects are inputs, outputs, and decisions. Reported problems involve the absence of monitoring practices, the need to create custom monitoring tools, and the selection of suitable metrics. [Conclusion] Our results help provide a better understanding of the adopted practices and problems in practice and support guiding ML deployment and monitoring research in a problem-driven manner.

Key words:

Machine Learning, Deployment, Monitoring

## 1 Introduction

In  recent  years,  the  advancements  in  Machine  Learning  (ML)  and,  altogether, Artificial Intelligence (AI), have helped the incoming of technological innovation and  transformation  across  various  industries.  These  ML-enabled  systems  have shown capabilities  in  automating complex tasks, making data-driven decisions, and enhancing overall efficiency. However, despite their immense potential, the implementation of ML-enabled systems requires practitioners to adapt processes to successfully develop, deploy, and monitor in production operation. In the same level, Software Engineering (SE) practices can help to speed up the development of such features. However, ML-enabled systems are inherently different by nature affecting rendering traditional SE practices insufficient to be directly applied, thus, revealing new challenges [1].

In  regard  to  the  current  increase  in  ML  system  usage,  this  paper  aims  to identify  potential  industrial  problems  and  the  current  status  quo  in  terms  of practices applied in the development of ML-enabled software systems. With the main goal of understanding the pain points and how those systems are made, we conducted a questionnaire-based online survey. Although many other concerns appeared in the responses, such as issues in Requirements Engineering and Data Quality,  the  work  presented  in  this  paper  focuses  on  the  model  deployment and monitoring of ML-enabled systems. Our focus is on evaluating exprienced challenges as well as approaches employed.

The main findings show that practitioners perceive the model deployment and monitoring  phases  as  relevant,  but  also  challenging.  With  respect  to  model deployment, we observed that models are mainly deployed as separate services and that embedding the model within the consuming application or platform-asa-service solutions are less frequently explored. Most practitioners do not follow MLOps principles and do not have an automated pipeline to retrain and rede- ploy the  models,  where  the  reported  deployment  problems  include  difficulties  in designing  the  architecture  of  the  infrastructure  for  production,  considering scalability  and  financial  constraints,  and  legacy  application  integration.  Concerning model monitoring, many of the models in production are not monitored at all, with the main aspects in scope of monitored are being outputs and decisions taken. Reported problems include not having model appropriate monitoring practices in place, the need for developing customized monitoring tools, and difficulties choosing the appropriate metrics.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section  2 provides the background and related work. In Section  3,  we describe the research method. Section 4 presents then the results which we discuss further in Section 5. In section 6, we critically reflect upon the threats to validity and mitigation actions before concluding our paper with Section 7.

## 2 Background and Related Work

Machine  Learning  (ML)  has  witnessed  various  advancements  in  recent  years, transforming various industries by enabling intelligent decision-making systems. Deploying ML models into real-world applications, however, presents complex challenges related to model performance, reliability, and maintenance. This section provides an overview of the research landscape concerning the deployment and monitoring of Machine Learning systems.

The use of Machine Learning in practical applications dates back to the year of 1952  when  English  Mathematician  Arthur  Samuel  created  the  first  Machine Learning program to play championship-level game of checkers [2]. However, it is in the past decade that ML deployments have gained widespread attention in practice due to the availability of large datasets, more powerful computing hardware, and improved algorithms. Despite the rapid growth in ML adoption, there still exists a significant gap between the development of ML models in testing environments and their successful deployment in real-world settings, as reported by Paleyes et. al. [3], especially in the fields of integration, monitoring, and updating a model. Further discussions show that, within the model deployment phase (which includes the monitoring part), adapting existing techniques such as DevOps could be extremely helpful to make development and production environments even closer, where the term MLOps follows the same concept by bringing  together  data  scientists  and  operations  teams,  with  Meenu et.  al. [4] identifying the activities and placing stages, by conducting a systematic literature review (SLR) and grey literature review (GLR), in which organizations can improve their MLOps adoption.

To  represent the main issues  to  transition  models  to  production  architectures, some challenges were also identified and categorized by Lewis et. al. [5] in four spaces.  First,  utilizing  software  architecture  practices  that  are  proven  effective to traditional applications, but do not take into account the data driven aspect of such projects, meaning that the design and development of ML models, will have to be approached with new frameworks, as the one presented by Meenu et. al. [6]  Second,  creating  patterns  and  tactics  to  achieve  ML  Quality  Attributes (QAs),  where  existing  metrics  will  need  to  be  revisited  and  new  ones  will  be created to better evaluate systems. Third, the monitorability as a driving quality attribute,  by  having  the  infrastructure  behind  the  monitoring  platform  to  be responsible for collecting specific information related to changes in the dataset, as well as the incorporated user feedback, to observe the impacts to deployed ML systems. Fourth, co-architecting and co-versioning, where the architecture of the ML system itself, alongside the architecture that supports its life cycle, will have to  be  developed  in  sync,  like  the  MLOps  pipeline  and  the  system  integration, and the existing dataset as well as the programming code.

Apart from the architecture challenges, previous research has explored different deployment models for ML systems, as the SLR, and a GLR, conducted by Meenu et. al. [7] by providing an overview of the AI deployment's status quo and practices to further design a deployment framework for these systems. Today's approaches range from traditional batch processing [8] to real-time streaming

## 4 E. Zimelewicz et al.

deployments [9] and, most currently, an increase in use of the cloud service offerings  such  as  FaaS  (Function  as  a  Service)  [10],  SaaS  (Software  as  a  Service) [11],  PaaS  (Platform  as  a  Service)  [12]  and  IaaS  (Infrastructure  as  a  Service) [13], representing the benefits of cloud adoption by the practitioners such as the relief from the burden of servers' management, faster time to go into production, cost optimization and performance increase. Alongside the deployment models, the existing software architectures approaches are also getting adapted to ML models such as containerization [14], microservices [15], and serverless computing  [16]  have gained  prominence  in  ensuring model  deployment flexibility  and scalability.

Recent studies have focused on the monitoring and maintenance of ML models. Researchers have proposed techniques for detecting Machine Learning specific metrics such as model drift, handling concept drift, and ensuring that models remain accurate and reliable over time [17, 18], which involves concepts such as  statistical  process  control,  anomaly detection, and  continuous  integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD) practices.

The  presented  literature  demonstrates  the  diverse  nature  of  ML  deployment and  monitoring  challenges.  While  numerous  strategies  and  techniques  have  been proposed,  there  remains  a  need  for  a  holistic  framework  that  addresses  these challenges and their current approach to solve them. Building upon the insights gained from the review of existing literature and the applied survey, this paper presents an overview to address the challenges of ML model deployments and monitoring. In the subsequent sections, we delve into the details of our research survey.

## 3 Research Method

## 3.1 Goal and Research Questions

The main goal of the research study focused on surveying the current status quo and problems through the entire development lifecycle of a ML system, but for the context of the current paper, the analysis will be based on two of the most problematic concerns in maintaining the model: (i) making the model available as quickly as possible in production and (ii) managing the model and re-training it along its continuous deployment based on monitored aspects. From this goal, we inferred the following research questions:

- -RQ1. What are contemporary practices for deploying ML models? Under  this  question,  we  aim  at  identifying  the  in-use  practices  and  trends of  the  deployment  stage  and  can  refine  it  further  into  three  more  detailed questions:
- -RQ1.1. What kind of approaches are used to deploy ML models?
- -RQ1.2. Which tools are used for automating model retraining?
- -RQ1.3. What are the MLOps practices and principles used?

- -RQ2.  What  are  the  main  problems  faced  during  the  deployment  in  the  ML life cycle stage?
- -RQ3. What are contemporary practices for monitoring ML models? Under this question, we aim at identifying the in-use practices and trends of the monitoring stage and can refine itinto two more detailed questions:
- -RQ3.1. What  percentage  of  the  ML-enabled  system  projects  that  get  deployed into production have their ML models actually being monitored?
- -RQ3.2. What aspects of the models are monitored?
- -RQ4. What are the main problems faced during the monitoring in the ML life cycle stage?
- -RQ5. What is the percentage of projects that effectively go into production?

## 3.2 Survey Design

We designed our survey based on best community practices of survey research [19], carefully conducting, in essence, the following steps:

- -Step  1.  Initial  Survey  Design .  We  conducted  a  literature  review  on  ML deployment and monitoring and combined our findings with previous results on  problems  and  the  status  quo  to  provide  the  theoretical  foundations  for questions  and  answer  options.  From  there,  we  drafted  the  initial  survey  by involving Software Engineering and Machine Learning  researchers  of  PUC-  Rio (Brazil)  with  experience  in  R&amp;D  projects  involving  ML-enabled  systems.
- -Step 2. Survey Design Review .  The  survey  was  reviewed  and  adjusted based on online discussions and annotated feedback from Software Engineering  and Machine Learning researchers of BTH (Sweden). Thereafter, the survey was also reviewed by the other co-authors.
- -Step 3. Pilot  Face  Validity  Evaluation .  This  evaluation  involves  a lightweight review  by  randomly  chosen  respondents.  It  was  conducted  with  18 Ph.D. students taking a Survey Research Methods course at UCLM (Spain) taught by the second author. They were asked to provide feedback on the clearness of the questions and to record their response time. This phase re- sulted in minor adjustments  related  to  usability  aspects  and  unclear  wording.  The  answers were discarded before launching the survey.
- -Step 4.  Pilot  Content  Validity  Evaluation .  This  evaluation  involves  sub- ject experts from the target population. Therefore, we selected five experi- enced data  scientists  developing  ML-enabled  systems,  asked  them  to  answer  the survey,  and  gathered  their  feedback.  The  participants  had  no  difficulties answering the survey, and it took an average of 20 minutes. After this step, the survey was considered ready to be launched.

The final survey started with a consent form describing the purpose of the study and stating that it is conducted anonymously. The remainder was divided into 15 demographic questions (D1 to D15) followed by three specific parts with 17  substantive  questions (Q1  to  Q17):  7  on the  ML  life  cycle  and  problems,  5 on requirements, and 5 on deployment and monitoring. This paper focuses on the ML life cycle problems related to model deployment and aspects of monitoring, and the specific questions regarding problems motives. The excerpts of the questions we deem relevant in context of the paper at hands are shown in Table 1. The survey was implemented using the Unipark Enterprise Feedback Suite.

## 3.3 Data Collection

Our  target  population  concerns  professionals  involved  in  building  ML-enabled systems, including different activities, such as management, design, and development. Therefore, it includes practitioners in positions such as project leaders, requirements engineers, data scientists, and developers. We used convenience sampling, sending the survey link to professionals active in our partner companies, and also distributed it openly on social media. We excluded participants that informed having no experience with ML-enabled system projects. Data col- lection was open from January 2022 to April 2022. In total, we received responses  from 276  professionals,  out  of  which  188  completed  all  four  survey  sections.  The average time to complete the survey was 20 minutes. We conservatively considered only the 188 fully completed survey responses.

## 3.4 Data  Analysis  Procedures

For data analysis purposes, given that all questions were optional, the number of responses varies across the survey questions. Therefore, we explicitly indicate the number of responses when analyzing each question.

Research questions RQ1.1, RQ3.1, RQ3.2, and RQ5 concern a mix of closed questions and optional free fields, so we decided to use inferential statistics to analyze them. Our population has an unknown theoretical distribution ( i.e. , the distribution of ML-enabled system professionals is unknown). In such cases, resampling methods - like bootstrapping - have been reported to be more reliable and accurate than inference statistics from samples [20, 19]. Hence, we use bootstrapping to calculate confidence intervals for our results, similar as done in [21]. In short, bootstrapping involves repeatedly taking samples with replacements and then  calculating  the  statistics  based  on  these  samples.  For  each  question,  we take the sample of n responses for that question and bootstrap S resamples (with replacements) of the same size n . We assume n as the total valid answers of each question [22], and we set 1000 for S , which is a value that is reported to allow meaningful statistics [23].

For research  questions RQ1.2,  RQ1.3,  RQ2,  RQ3.1  and  RQ4 ,  which  seek to identify  the main  problems  faced  by  practitioners  involved  in  engineering MLenabled  systems  related  to  model  deployment  and  monitoring,  alongside questions regarding which current practices are being applied, what amount of models that are generally available for users and the current monitored aspects, had their corresponding survey question designed to be open text. We conducted a  qualitative  analysis  using  open  and  axial  coding  procedures  from  grounded theory [24] to allow the problems to emerge from the open-text responses reflecting the  experience  of the  practitioners. The  qualitative  coding  procedures

Table 1. Research questions and survey questions

| RQ    | Survey No.   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Type                           |
|-------|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| -     | ...          | ...                                                                                                                                                                                                         | ...                            |
| RQ5   | D7           | How many ML-enabled system projects have you participated in? Please, provide your best estimate:                                                                                                           | Open                           |
| RQ5   | D8           | Of all the ML-enabled system projects you have participated in, how many were actually deployed into a production environment (e.g., released to the final cus- tomer)? Please, provide your best estimate: | Open                           |
| -     | ...          | ...                                                                                                                                                                                                         | ...                            |
| RQ2   | Q4           | According to your personal experi- ence, please outline the main prob- lems or difficulties (up to three) faced during each of the seven ML life cycle stages.                                              | Open                           |
| RQ4   | Q4           | According to your personal experi- ence, please outline the main prob- lems or difficulties (up to three) faced during each of the seven ML life cycle stages.                                              | Open                           |
| -     | ...          | ...                                                                                                                                                                                                         | ...                            |
| RQ1.1 | Q13          | In the context of the ML-enabled system projectsyou participatedin, which approach is typically used to deploy ML models?                                                                                   | Multiple Option and Free Field |
| RQ1.2 | Q14          | Do you/your organization follow the practice and principles of ML- Ops in ML-enabled system projects? For instance, do you have an automated pipeline to re- train and deploy your ML models?               | Single Option and Free Field   |
| RQ1.3 | Q14          | Do you/your organization follow the practice and principles of ML- Ops in ML-enabled system projects? For instance, do you have an automated pipeline to re- train and deploy your ML models?               | Single Option and Free Field   |
| RQ3.1 | Q15          | Based on your experience, what percentage of the ML-enabled sys- temprojects that get deployed into production have their MLmodels actually being monitored?                                                | Open                           |
| RQ3.2 | Q16          | Which of the following ML model aspects are monitored for the deployed ML-enabled system projects you have worked on?                                                                                       | Multiple Option and Free Field |
| -     | ...          | ...                                                                                                                                                                                                         | ...                            |

## 8 E. Zimelewicz et al.

were conducted by one PhD student, reviewed by her advisor at PUC-Rio, and reviewed independently by three researchers from two additional sites (two from BTH Sweden and one independent researcher from Turkey). The questionnaire, the  collected  data,  and  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  data  analysis  artifacts, including Python scripts for the bootstrapping statistics and graphs and the peerreviewed  qualitative  coding  spreadsheets,  are  available  in  our  open  science repository 1 .

## 4 Results

All  of  the  data  that  follows  the  study  come  with  the  bootstrapped  samples together with the 95% confidence interval. The N in each figure caption is the number of participants that answered this question. We report the proportion P of the participants that checked the corresponding answer and its 95% confidence interval in square brackets.

## 4.1 Study  Population

Figure 1 summarizes demographic information on the survey participants' coun -tries, roles, and experience with ML-enabled system projects in years. It is possible  to  observe  that  the  participants  came  from  different  parts  of  the  world, representing various roles and experiences. While the figure shows only the ten countries with the most responses, we had respondents from 25 countries. As expected, our convenience sampling strategy influenced the countries, with most responses being from diverse countries (Brazil, Turkey, Austria, Germany, Sweden, and Italy).

Fig. 1. Demographic graphs for participant's countries, roles and ML work experience

<!-- image -->

Regarding employment, 45% of the participants are employed in large companies (2000+ employees), while 55% work in smaller ones of different sizes. It is  possible  to  observe that they are mainly data scientists, followed by project leaders, developers, and solution architects. Regarding their experience with MLenabled systems, most of the participants reported having 1 to 2 years of experience.  Following  closely,  another  substantial group  of participants  indicated  a higher experience bracket of 3 to 6 years. This distribution highlights a balanced representation  of  novice  and  experienced  practitioners.  Regarding  the  participants' educational background, 81.38% mentioned having a bachelor's degree in computer science, electrical engineering, information systems, mathematics, or statistics. Moreover, 53.72% held master's degrees, and 22.87% completed Ph.D. programs.

1 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10092394

## 4.2 Model Deployment and Monitoring evaluation

In the survey, we used the same abstraction of seven generic life cycle phases of  a  popular  Brazilian  textbook  on  software  engineering  for  data  science  [25]: problem understanding and requirements, data collection, data pre-processing, model creation and training, model evaluation, model deployment, and model monitoring. These phases were abstracted based on the nine ML life cycle phases presented by Amershi et  al. [26] and the CRISP-DM industry-independent process model phases [27]. We asked about the perceived relevance and difficulty of each of the seven phases. For the purposes of this paper and for the sake of simplicity, we represent only the deployment and monitoring life cycle phases.

Fig. 2. Perceived relevance percentages of the Model Deployment and Model Monitoring activities according to survey participants

<!-- image -->

The relevance evaluation in Figure 2 shows that the majority of respondents view these activities as highly to extremely relevant, it signifies the critical role they play in the software development life cycle, but still open to an increase in their value for projects.

Although respondents find those relevant, it does not necessarily reflect the expectations with the difficulty represented in Figure  3, where the minority of practitioners find it complex up to very complex, possible due to the new solutions that come with a complete platform ready to have models deployed and, consequently, getting monitored out of the box.

Ea

Ve

· Co

Ve Service

Embedded Model

Paas

Others

20

## 10 E. Zimelewicz et al.

Fig. 3. Perceived difficulty percentages of Model Deployment and Model Monitoring activities according to survey participants

<!-- image -->

## 4.3 What are contemporary practices for  deployment?  (RQ1) [RQ1.1]

## What  kind  of  approaches  are  used  to  deploy  ML  models?

For the first question of the survey regarding deployments, the participant were asked about which approach they usually take for hosting their models as shown in Figure 4, where respondents could select more than one option. For the most part, Service was the top choice with P = 59.457 [59.219, 59.695] , followed by Embedded Models with P = 42.719  [42.476,  42.962] and PaaS with P = 23.826 [23.628, 24.024] . Other solutions were also opened for answers and grouped in Others with P = 5.47 [5.359,  5.58] .

Fig. 4. Percentage of deployment approaches used by survey participants (N=168)

<!-- image -->

[RQ1.2] Which tools are used for automating model retraining?  and [RQ1.3] What are  the  MLOps  practices  and  principles  used? To  de- scribe the usage of MLOps in the life cycle,  we  asked  if the respondents'  organi -  zations follow  any  of  the  practices  or  principles,  followed  by  a  follow  up  question  if  a foundational practice, such as an automated retraining pipeline, was used. The results  are  summarizsed in Figure 5. The majority answered No with P =  70.911  [70.694,  71.128] and,  followed  by Yes with P  =  29.089  [28.872, 29.306] . In regards to MLOps, some of the answers were between having their own pipeline built on top a continuous delivery tool (e.g. Gitlab CI/CD [28] and Financial issues (4.93%)

Resources (2.11%)

Lack of time (2.11%)

Data engineer

unavailable (1.41%)

Lack of prioritization

(1.41%)

Communication

issues among the

team (1.41%)

Lack of documentation

(0.70%)

Organization (14.08%)

Method (17.61%)

Software Engineering best

practices (0.70%)

Programming language (0.70%)

Metrics (0.70%)|

Meet regulatory requirements (0.70%)

Create robust APls (0.70%)

Feature selection (0.70%)

Client validation (0.70%)

Complex UI (1.41%)

API use (2.11%)

Scalability (6.34%)

Performance issues (2.82%)|

(2.11%)

Communication (2.11%)|

User acceptance (0.70%)

<!-- image -->

Infrastructure (4.23%)

Production infrastructure (deploy)

(42.96%)

Model

Azure DevOps [29]) and Machine Learning specific development platform such as BentoML [30], MLFlow [31] and AWS Sagemaker MLOps [32], which follows practices as model re-training and monitoring of relevant aspects.

Insufficient data (0.76%)|

Data (1.41%)

Fig. 5. Ans wers regarding the survey participant's organization usage of MLOps prin -ciples (N=168)

## 4.4 What are the main problems faced during the deployment in the ML life cycle stage? (RQ2)

The survey had two questions regarding the main problems faced by practitioners through the deployment and monitoring of models. Figure 6 presents the results of the open and axial coding of the answers for the deployment phase using the probabilistic cause-effect diagrams introduced by Kalinowski et al. [33, 34].

Fig. 6. Probabilistic cause-effect diagram related to answers regarding the main problems faced during the model deployment stage (N=142)

<!-- image -->

As per the survey respondents, the top problems faced within the deployment phase were preparing the infrastructure for production deployment, the difficulty

Infrastructure (60.56%)

Updating the libraries used (0.70%)

Model monitoring (0.70%)

Computational constraints (2.11%)

Model update / MLOPS (2.82%)

0 ~ 20%

20% ~ 40%

40% ~ 60%

60% ~ 80%

80% ~ 100%

10

## 12 E. Zimelewicz et al.

on integrating with legacy applications, what infrastructure architecture to use, how to scale it, and the financial limitations.

20

30

40

## 4.5 What are contemporary practices for monitoring? (RQ3)

[RQ3.1]  What  percentage  of  the  ML-enabled  system  projects  that  get deployed into production have their ML models actually being moni- tored? To evaluate if the deployed projects went through the whole life cycle up until getting  monitored,  Figure  7  shows  that P = 33.079  [32.842,  33.316] participants responded that less than 20% of projects do get into production with their aspects monitored, followed by P = 21.143 [20.942, 21.344] responding from 20% to 40%, P = 19.13 [18.943, 19.317] answering that 80% to 100%, P = 18.64 [18.456, 18.824] from 40% to 60% and, finally, P = 8.009 [7.874, 8.144] with 60% to 80% get the released project monitored somehow.

Fig. 7. Percentage of answers for models, deployed to production, that have their aspects monitored (N=160)

<!-- image -->

[RQ3.2] What aspects of the  models  are  monitored? Concerning  the model monitoring,  respondents  described  which  monitoring  aspects  were  actu-  ally monitored as in Figure 8. Participants could be selecting more than one op- tion, having Input  and  Output as  the  most  frequent  response  with P = 62.675 [62.431, 62.918] , followed by Output and Decisions with P = 62.082 [61.834, 62.331] , Interpretability Output with P = 28.034 [27.805, 28.263] , Fairness with P = 12.965 [12.792, 13.138] , and other aspects that were grouped in Others with P = 5.874 [5.761, 5.987] .

## 4.6 What are the main problems faced during the monitoring in the ML life cycle stage? (RQ4)

Figure 9 presents the results of the open and axial coding of the answers for the main problems of the monitoring phase.

Method (48.28%)

Input and Output

Others (11 itens) (0.86% each)

Improving the model (1.72%)

Evaluate performance (1.72%)

Drifts (1.72%)

Model update (2.59%)

Output and Decisions

Model improvement (2.59%)

Lack of monitoring interfaces (2.59%)

Live feedback (4.31%)

Choose and evaluate the metrics (15.52%)

Lack of prioritization

(1.72%)

Data quality (1.72%)

Lack of time (1.72%)

Others ·

Infrastructure (32.76%)

Version control (0.86%)

Infrastructure (0.86%)

Architecture (0.86%)

Dynamic environment - need to

update the model (2.59%)

Computational constraints (2.59%)

Lack of domain

Data accessibility (0.86%)

Insufficient data (0.86%)

People to monitor

(0.86%)

Organization (5.17%)

25

How to split the dataset (0.86%)

Data (4.31%)

Fig. 8. Percentage of answers regarding which of the ML system aspects are monitored (N=153)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 9. Probabilistic cause-effect diagram related to answers regarding the main problems faced during the model monitoring stage (N=116)

<!-- image -->

Here, the most observed concerns were related to the need of developing their own monitoring tools, evaluating and choosing the appropriate metrics, while not having any experience in monitoring models and in building monitoring  platforms.

## 4.7 What is the percentage of projects that do go into production? (RQ5)

To describe the population of projects that live up until their general release, data from the demographic questions D7 and D8 (after data cleaning) were combined into Figure 10. As this figure shows, P = 24.965 [24.759, 25.171] participants responded that between only 0% to 20% projects went into production, followed by P = 23.553 [23.337, 23.768] saying 40% to 60%, then P =

knowledge (2.59%)

50

Lack of production

support (0.86%)

monitoring

0 ~ 20%

20% ~ 40%

40% ~ 60%

60% ~ 80%

80% ~ 100%

5

10

21.221 [21.029, 21.412] with 80% to 100%, P =  17.796  [17.618, 17.974] saying 20% to 40% and, finally P = 12.465 [12.306,  12.624] responding with 60% to 80%. By getting all of the percentages calculated and returning the mean value, this leaves us with an average of 45.41% of executed projects reaching gen-  eral availability.

Fig. 10. The percentage of ML projects that do go into production (N=169)

<!-- image -->

## 5 Discussion

Deploying  Machine  Learning  models  into  production  environments  can  be  a complex and challenging task, often accompanied by several problems and considerations.  As  observed  by  the  survey results  as  well, the  model  deployment and monitoring phases are found to be relevant by almost 75% of respondents, corroborating the importance of releasing it to the public and the constant performance  analysis  for  a  continuous  increase  on  quality.  Although  to  be  found important, its difficulty rates decreased to almost 50% for deployment and 30% for monitoring, showing that a lack of opportunity to evaluate a model that is deployed into production could influence the entire development process analysis.  For  this  case,  M¨ akinen et.  al. [35]  surveyed  data  scientists  to  observe  which type of organization would benefit from the MLOps practices, categorizing some of them as the top beneficiaries where the need for model retraining and deployment were extremely important to their natural next step into production models, showing a potential shift in the evaluation if more automated processes were applied to projects.

Through the deployment practices identified, it is evident that ML engineers are deploying most of their models through the Service approach, identifying a growing reliance on cloud-based services that offer comprehensive and scalable solutions already prepared, but compromising customization. Moreover, if integrating with external systems were found to be hard, Embedded Model seemed an alternative approach of choice, leveraging the operation efficiency of an existing software and faster response times, even though its monitoring and scaling difficulty were increased due to the lack of separation from the software that includes the model. At last, having the model deployed in a Platform as a Service approach promises to provide full customization of the infrastructure and flexible environment, although the increasing need for specialized expertise to enable its full potential seems important in this approach through such a complex system.

As per the identified  lack  of  MLOps  practices  used,  participants  answered that less than 30% apply some of its principles. This  suggests that despite the growing importance of Machine Learning in various industries, a significant number of professionals may not be fully engaged with MLOps, although numerous studies have proven its benefits [36] and providing guidance on establishing the platform [37], unveiling a potential research on how MLOps could influence the work of professionals. Although not fully applied, some of the practices do come embedded in ready to use platforms, also mentioned in the survey, facilitating the adoption quicker than by creating it from the ground up and expanding the usage in seamless way.

To enforce the main problems encountered as per Figure 6, exemplified by this study  as  issues  such  as  production  level  infrastructure  management  and integration with legacy systems, Nahar et al. [1] had a systematic literature  review of challenges in building ML components. They revealed similar results related to deployment, the main challenges encountered along shifts from model-  centric to pipeline-driven developments, difficulties in scaling model training and deployment on different types of hardware, and limited technical support for engineering  infrastructure.  For  model  monitoring,  as  per  Figure  9,  it  shows  that choosing the metrics and developing new tools to adequate to project's moni -toring necessities are the more prominent problems, where Nahar et al. observes that  the  monitorability  of  a  model  being  considered  late  to  be  implemented, providing data quality due  to not having well  supported tools, lack of  support to setup an infrastructure for detecting training-serving skew, and difficulty on designing specific metrics are aligned with the participants' feelings within the survey.

For the monitoring aspects, the survey highlights that the number of models that do go into production and have their aspects monitored are less than 50%, which highlights  to  us  the  potential  on monitorability  exploration for  identifying  aspects,  detecting  metrics,  and  creating  new  tools  to  increase  the  quality attributes of ML models. Following the current status of the monitoring phase, when participants  have  been  asked  which  aspects  were  monitored,  input  and output data stands out.  This  emphasizes  the  critical role  of  data  integrity  and quality in the overall performance and robustness of Machine Learning systems by identifying potential biases, anomalies, and inconsistencies that could impact the  accuracy  and reliability  of model  predictions.  Furthermore, monitoring  the decisions assesses the correctness and effectiveness of model predictions and the process of decision making to validate the alignment between what was predicted and real-world outcomes. It also shows that the monitoring of interpretability output emerges as another prominent aspect, highlighting the increasing focus on enhancing  the  transparency  and  explainability  of  Machine  Learning  models, particularly  crucial  in  domains  such  as  establishing  trust  and  verifying  model behavior. Lastly, fairness monitoring demonstrates the growing recognition of the ethical implications of algorithms, spurring efforts to monitor and mitigate biases and  discriminatory  outcomes  in  model  predictions,  which  underscores  the commitment to developing inclusive and equitable Machine Learning systems.

As per Figure 10, less than 50% of projects go into production, still showing a standing pattern where earlier reports [38, 39] and books [40] identified that most of the ML projects fail to get generally available due to several problems. Some of those were identified in this study and are possibly related, such as the organization being unable to fit the infrastructure to the needs of engineering teams, financial  issues  and  not  having  sufficient  expertise  on  the  software engineering process that are, most likely, the lack of specialized professionals. As per Figure  1,  qualified  personnel  such  as  Cloud  Infrastructure  Engineers,  Data Engineers, and Software Architects were not significantly identified in the team. However, due to the increasing value given to ML models deployment into production, articles such as Heymann et. al. [41] will be in evidence to set a common place for frameworks, guides, and books responsible for developing production level ML models and how to apply them.

## 6 Threats to Validity

We identified some threats while planning, conducting, and analyzing the survey results. Hereafter, we list the most  prominent threats organized by the survey validity types presented in [42].

Face  and  Content  Validity .  Face  and  content  validity  threats  include  bad instrumentation and inadequate explanation of the constructs. To mitigate these threats, we involved several researchers in reviewing and evaluating the questionnaire with respect to the format and formulation of the questions, piloting it with 18 Ph.D. students for face validity and with five experienced data scientists for content validity.

Criterion Validity . Threats to criterion validity include not surveying  the target population. We clarified the target population in the consent form (before  starting the  survey).  We  also  considered  only  complete  answers  ( i.e. ,  answers  of participants  that  answered  all  survey  sections)  and  excluded  participants  that informed having no experience with ML-enabled system projects.

Construct  Validity .  We  ground  our survey's questions  and  answer  options on theoretical background from previous studies [43, 21] and readings based on identified challenges in model deployment and monitoring [3] and in software architecture [5]. A threat to construct validity is inadequate measurement procedures and unreliable results. To mitigate this threat we follow recommended data collection and analysis procedures [19].

Reliability .  One  aspect  of  reliability  is  statistical  generalizability.  We  could not  construct a random sample systematically covering different  types of  pro- fessionals involved in developing ML-enabled systems, and there is yet no generalized knowledge about what such a population looks like. Furthermore, as a consequence of convenience sampling, the majority of answers came from Europe and South America, most of it from Brazil. Nevertheless, the experience and background profiles of the subjects are comparable to the profiles of ML teams as shown in Microsoft's study [44],  showing that the nationality attribute did not interfered with the results. To deal with the random sampling limitation, we used bootstrapping and only employed confidence intervals, conservatively avoiding null  hypothesis  testing.  Another  reliability  aspect  concerns  inter-observer  reliability,  which  we  improved  by  including  independent  peer  review  in  all  our qualitative  analysis  procedures  and  making  all  the  data  and  analyses  openly available online.

## 7 Conclusion

The current study sought to provide a comprehensive overview of the prevailing trends on practices and challenges in model deployment and monitoring within the context of Machine Learning. Through our questionnaire-based online survey targeting practitioners, we identified several key insights allowing us to elaborate as well on potential directions for future research and development. Our analysis underscores the increasing approach on leveraging cloud-based services for model deployment, with a notable emphasis on scalability, accessibility, and seamless integration.  This  should  support  the  growing  demand  for  efficient  and  userfriendly deployment solutions, catering to the diverse needs and constraints of contemporary  applications.  Furthermore,  the  emphasis  on  monitoring  aspects reflects the heightened awareness of the critical role played by data quality, model accuracy, and transparency in ensuring the reliability and ethical soundness of Machine Learning models.

While  the  current  work  provides  a  comprehensive  snapshot  of  the  status quo, it also points towards several areas for further investigation and development. The increasing complexity of Machine Learning models and the dynamic nature of real-world applications, necessitate a more nuanced understanding of deployment and monitoring strategies that can adapt to diverse use cases and evolving  challenges.  Future  research  endeavors  should  prioritize  the  development of robust and scalable deployment frameworks that accommodate a wide range  of  ML  models  and  their  applications,  focusing  in  better  specific  infrastructure management and seamless integration to other services. Additionally, there is a pressing need to advance methodologies for comprehensive and realtime  monitoring,  through  incisive  metrics  discovery  and  ML-ready  monitoring tools, enabling stakeholders to proactively identify and address potential biases, vulnerabilities, and performance bottlenecks in Machine Learning models.

The findings presented in this study contribute to the broader discourse surrounding the deployment and monitoring of Machine Learning models, highlighting the significance of holistic and adaptive approaches that prioritize reliability, interpretability, and observability. By leveraging the insights gleaned from

## 18 E. Zimelewicz et al.

this research, stakeholders and practitioners can take their efforts towards the responsible  and  impactful  development  of Machine  Learning technologies  and researchers can better root their ongoing research on practically relevant needs.

## References

1. Nahar,  N.,  Zhang,  H.,  Lewis,  G.,  Zhou,  S.,  Kastner,  C.:  A  meta-summary  of challenges in building products with ml components -collecting experiences from 4758+ practitioners. In:  2023 IEEE/ACM  2nd International  Conference  on  AI Engineering -Software Engineering for AI (CAIN), Los Alamitos, CA, USA, IEEE Computer Society (may 2023) 171 -183
2. Up, S.: Machine learning history: The complete timeline (September 2022)
3. Paleyes, A., Urma, R.G., Lawrence, N.D.: Challenges in deploying machine learning: A survey of case studies. ACM Comput. Surv. 55 (6) (dec 2022)
4. John, M.M., Olsson, H.H., Bosch, J.: Towards mlops: A framework and maturity model. In: 2021 47th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA). (2021) 1 -8
5. Lewis,  G.A., Ozkaya,  I., Xu,  X.: Software  architecture  challenges for  ml  systems. In:  2021 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). (2021) 634 -638
6. John, M.M., Olsson, H.H., Bosch, J.: Ai deployment architecture: Multi-case study for key factor identification. In: 2020 27th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC). (2020) 395 -404
7. John,  M.M.,  Holmstrom  Olsson,  H.,  Bosch,  J.:  Architecting  ai  deployment:  A systematic review of state-of-the-art and state-of-practice literature.  In Klotins, E., Wnuk, K., eds.: Software Business, Cham, Springer International Publishing (2021) 14 -29
8. Zaharia, M., Xin, R.S., Wendell, P., Das, T., Armbrust, M., Dave, A., Meng, X., Rosen, J., Venkataraman, S., Franklin, M.J., Ghodsi, A., Gonzalez, J., Shenker, S., Stoica, I.:  Apache  spark:  A  unified  engine for  big  data  processing.  Commun. ACM 59 (11) (oct 2016) 56 -65
9. Syafrudin, M., Alfian, G., Fitriyani, N.L., Rhee, J.: Performance analysis of iot- based sensor, big data processing, and machine learning model for real-time mon-  itoring system in automotive manufacturing.  Sensors 18 (9) (2018)
10. Chahal, D., Ojha, R., Ramesh, M., Singhal, R.: Migrating large deep  learning models to serverless architecture.  (2020) 111 -116 Cited by: 14.
11. Nowrin, I., Khanam, F.:  Importance of cloud deployment model and security issues of  software  as  a  service  (saas)  for  cloud  computing.  In:  2019  International Conference on Applied Machine Learning (ICAML). (2019) 183 -186
12. Mrozek, D., Koczur, A., Ma-lysiak-Mrozek, B.: Fall detection in older adults with mobile iot devices and machine learning in the cloud and on the edge. Information Sciences 537 (2020) 132 -147 Cited by: 72; All Open Access, Hybrid Gold Open Access.
13. Abdelaziz, A., Elhoseny, M., Salama, A.S., Riad, A.: A machine learning model for improving healthcare services on cloud computing environment. Measurement 119 (2018) 117 -128
14. Garg, S., Pundir, P., Rathee, G., Gupta, P., Garg, S., Ahlawat, S.: On continuous integration / continuous delivery for automated deployment of machine learning

- models using mlops.  In: 2021 IEEE Fourth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Knowledge Engineering (AIKE). (2021) 25 -28
15. Al-Doghman, F., Moustafa, N., Khalil, I., Sohrabi, N., Tari, Z., Zomaya, A.Y.: Ai-enabled secure microservices in edge computing: Opportunities and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 16 (2)  (2023) 1485 -1504
16. Paraskevoulakou,  E.,  Kyriazis,  D.:    Ml-faas:  Towards  exploiting  the  serverless paradigm to facilitate machine learning functions as a service.  IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management (2023) 1 -1
17. Kourouklidis, P., Kolovos, D., Noppen, J., Matragkas, N.:  A model-driven engineering  approach  for  monitoring  machine  learning  models.  In:  2021  ACM/IEEE International  Conference  on  Model  Driven  Engineering  Languages  and  Systems Companion (MODELS-C). (2021) 160 -164
18. Schr¨ oder, T., Schulz, M.:  Monitoring machine learning models: a categorization of challenges and  methods.  Data Science  and Management 5 (3)  (2022)  105 -116
19. Wagner, S., Mendez, D., Felderer, M., Graziotin, D., Kalinowski, M.: Challenges in survey research. Contemporary Empirical Methods in Software Engineering (2020) 93 -125
20. Lunneborg, C.E.:  Bootstrap inference for local populations.  Therapeutic Innovation &amp; Regulatory Science 35 (4) (2001) 1327 -1342
21. Wagner,  S.,  Fern´ andez,  D.M.,  Felderer,  M.,  Vetr` o,  A.,  Kalinowski,  M.,  Wieringa, R., Pfahl,  D.,  Conte, T.,  Christiansson, M.T.,  Greer,  D., Lassenius,  C.,  M¨ annist¨ o, T., Nayebi, M., Oivo, M., Penzenstadler, B., Prikladnicki, R., Ruhe, G., Schekelmann, A., Sen, S., Sp´ınola, R., Tuzcu, A., Vara, J.L.D.L., Winkler, D.: Status quo in requirements engineering: A theory and a global family of surveys. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 28 (2) (2019)
22. Efron,  B.,  Tibshirani,  R.J.:    An  Introduction  to  the  Bootstrap.    Chapman  &amp; Hall/CRC (1993)
23. Lei,  S.,  Smith,  M.:  Evaluation  of  several  nonparametric  bootstrap  methods  to estimate confidence intervals for software metrics. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 29 (11) (2003) 996 -1004
24. Stol, K.J., Ralph, P., Fitzgerald, B.:   Grounded theory in software engineering research: a critical review and guidelines. In: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering. (2016) 120 -131
25. Kalinowski, M., Escovedo, T., Villamizar, H., Lopes, H.: Engenharia de Software para  Ci ˆ encia  de  Dados:  Um  guia  de  boas  pr´ aticas  com ˆ enfase  na  constru¸ c ˜ ao  de sistemas  de  Machine  Learning  em  Python.  Casa  do  C´ odigo  (2023)
26. Amershi,  S.,  Begel,  A.,  Bird,  C.,  DeLine,  R.,  Gall,  H.,  Kamar,  E.,  Nagappan, N., Nushi, B., Zimmermann, T.: Software engineering for machine learning: A case study. In: 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice, IEEE (2019) 291 -300
27. Schr¨ oer,  C.,  Kruse,  F.,  G´ omez,  J.M.:   A  systematic  literature  review  on  applying crisp-dm process model. Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 526 -534
28. Gitlab:  Get started  with gitlab ci/cd (October 2023)
29. DevOps, A.:  What is azure devops? (October 2022)
30. BentoML:  What is bentoml? (October 2023)
31. MLflow: What is mlflow? (October 2023)
32. AWS: Amazon sagemaker for mlops (October 2023)
33. Kalinowski, M., Mendes, E., Card, D.N., Travassos, G.H.: Applying dppi: A defect causal analysis approach using bayesian networks. In: Product-Focused Software Process  Improvement:  11th  International  Conference,  PROFES  2010,  Limerick, Ireland, June 21-23, 2010. Proceedings 11, Springer (2010) 92 -106

## 20 E. Zimelewicz et al.

34. Kalinowski,  M.,  Mendes,  E.,  Travassos,  G.H.:  Automating  and  evaluating  probabilistic  cause-effect  diagrams  to  improve  defect  causal  analysis.  In:  ProductFocused Software Process Improvement: 12th International Conference, PROFES 2011, Torre Canne, Italy, June 20-22, 2011. Proceedings 12, Springer (2011) 232 -246
35. M¨ akinen, S., Skogstrom, H., Laaksonen, E., Mikkonen, T.: Who needs mlops: What data scientists seek to accomplish and how can mlops help? In: 2021 IEEE/ACM 1st Workshop on AI Engineering - Software Engineering for AI (WAIN). (2021) 109 -112
36. Ruf,  P.,  Madan,  M.,  Reich,  C.,  Ould-Abdeslam,  D.:  Demystifying  mlops  and  presenting a  recipe  for  the selection  of open-source  tools.  Applied  Sciences 11 (19) (2021)
37. Zhou, Y., Yu, Y., Ding, B.: Towards mlops: A case study of ml pipeline platform. In: 2020 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Computer Engineering (ICAICE). (2020) 494 -500
38. algorithmia: 2020 state of enterprise machine learning. Technical report (2019)
39. Siegel, E.: Models are rarely deployed: An industry-wide failure in machine learning leadership (January 2022)
40. Weiner, J.: Why AI/Data Science Projects Fail: How to  avoid  project  pitfalls. Morgan; Claypool Publishers (2021)
41. Heymann, H., Kies, A.D., Frye, M., Schmitt, R.H., Boza, A.: Guideline for deployment of machine learning models for predictive quality in production. Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 815 -820 Leading manufacturing systems transformation -Proceedings of the 55th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2022.
42. Linaker,  J.,  Sulaman,  S.M.,  H¨ ost,  M.,  de  Mello,  R.M.:   Guidelines  for  conducting surveys in software engineering v. 1.1.  Lund University 50 (2015)
43. Fern´ andez,  D.M.,  Wagner,  S.,  Kalinowski,  M.,  Felderer,  M.,  Mafra,  P.,  Vetr` o,  A., Conte, T., Christiansson, M.T., Greer, D., Lassenius, C., et al.: Naming the pain in requirements engineering: Contemporary problems, causes, and effects in practice. Empirical Software Engineering 22 (2017) 2298 -2338
44. Kim, M., Zimmermann, T., DeLine, R., Begel, A.: Data  scientists  in  software teams: State of the art and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 44 (11) (2017) 1024 -1038