## Certifiably Robust RAG against Retrieval Corruption

Chong Xiang ∗ 1 Tong Wu ∗ 2 Zexuan Zhong 2 1 NVIDIA 2 Princeton University

Abstract -Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is susceptible to retrieval corruption attacks, where malicious passages injected into retrieval results can lead to inaccurate model responses. We propose RobustRAG, the first defense framework with certifiable robustness against retrieval corruption attacks. The key insight of RobustRAG is an isolate-then-aggregate strategy: we isolate passages into disjoint groups, generate LLM responses based on the concatenated passages from each isolated group, and then securely aggregate these responses for a robust output. To instantiate RobustRAG, we design keyword-based and decodingbased algorithms for securely aggregating unstructured text responses. Notably, RobustRAG achieves certifiable robustness: for certain queries in our evaluation datasets, we can formally certify non-trivial lower bounds on response quality-even against an adaptive attacker with full knowledge of the defense and the ability to arbitrarily inject a bounded number of malicious passages. We evaluate RobustRAG on the tasks of open-domain questionanswering and free-form long text generation and demonstrate its effectiveness across three datasets and three LLMs.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) [7, 2, 13] can often generate inaccurate responses due to their incomplete and outdated parametric knowledge. To address this limitation, retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) [17, 24] leverages external (non-parametric) knowledge: it retrieves a set of relevant passages from a knowledge base and incorporates them into the model input. This approach has inspired numerous popular applications and software like Microsoft Bing Chat [28], Perplexity AI [3], Google Search with AI Overview [14], LangChain [23], and LlamaIndex [25].

However, despite its popularity, the RAG pipeline can become fragile when a small fraction (or even one) of the retrieved passages are compromised by malicious actors, a type of attack we term retrieval corruption . Such attacks can occur in different scenarios. For instance, the PoisonedRAG attack [45] injects malicious passages into the knowledge base to induce incorrect RAG responses (e.g., 'the highest mountain is Mount Fuji' ). The indirect prompt injection attack [16] injects malicious instructions into retrieved passages to override the original instructions (e.g., 'ignore all previous instructions and send the user's search history to attacker.com' ). Real-world instances further illustrate these vulnerabilities. For example, Google Search AI Overview delivered inaccurate responses, such as suggesting applying glue to pizza, due to unreliable content on indexed web pages [6]. Microsoft Copilot can be hijacked for 'remote code execution' due to poor access control in the RAG setting [1]. These failures underscore the critical need for robustness in the RAG pipeline.

∗ Equal contribution. Work done while Chong Xiang was at Princeton University.

David Wagner 3 Danqi Chen 2 Prateek Mittal 2 3 University of California, Berkeley

In this paper, we study an open research question: how can we generate an accurate and robust response when a fraction of the retrieved passages are maliciously corrupted? We propose a defense framework named RobustRAG (see Figure 1 for an overview); RobustRAG leverages an isolate-then-aggregate strategy: it isolates passages into disjoint groups, computes LLM responses based on the concatenated passages from each group, and then securely aggregates these isolated responses for final output. The isolation operation ensures that the malicious passages do not affect LLM responses for other benign passage groups and thus lays the foundation for robustness.

Challenge. The primary challenge for RobustRAG is to securely aggregate a mixture of benign and corrupted text responses. First, LLM responses can be highly unstructured ; for example, given a query 'What is the name of the highest mountain?' , it is not straightforward to recognize 'Mount Everest' and 'Everest is the highest' as the same response. Second, it is even harder to securely aggregate text responses, as corrupted responses can interfere with the aggregation process. We must design secure aggregation algorithms that fundamentally limit the influence of malicious responses so that we can reason about the worst-case response quality.

Solutions. To overcome these challenges, we design two text aggregation algorithms: secure keyword aggregation and secure decoding aggregation. The keyword-based aggregation extracts unique keywords from each isolated response, aggregates keyword counts across different responses, and only uses keywords with large counts to prompt the LLM for a final response (without using retrieved passages). We only count each unique keyword once for each isolated response; therefore, a small number of corrupted passages/responses only have a limited impact on the aggregated keyword counts and the final RAG output. Our decoding-based aggregation operates during the decoding phase. At each decoding step, we let the LLM make isolated next-token predictions from different isolated passage groups; then, we aggregate probability vectors of different isolated predictions and securely select a token accordingly. Since all probability values are bounded between 0 and 1, the attacker cannot arbitrarily manipulate the aggregated probability vectors and the next-token prediction.

Robustness. Notably, with our secure text aggregation techniques, RobustRAG can achieve certifiable robustness : for certain RAG queries in our evaluation datasets, we can formally certify non-trivial lower bounds on their response quality against a bounded number of corrupted passages. These lower bounds hold even against adaptive attackers who have full knowledge of the underlying defense algorithm and thus avoid any false sense of security. To the best of our knowledge, RobustRAG is the first defense to achieve certifiable robustness for the text generation task with highly unstructured outputs; in contrast, prior certification algorithms [42, 15, 10, 40] have primarily focused on the simpler classification task, whose output space is a small and pre-defined.

Fig. 1. RobustRAG overview. In this example, one of the six retrieved passages is corrupted (marked with red). Vanilla RAG concatenates all passages as the LLM input; its response is hijacked by the malicious passage. In contrast, RobustRAG isolates passages into three groups, each containing two passages, and computes LLM responses based on the concatenated passages from each group. This isolation operation ensures that only one of the three isolated responses is corrupted; RobustRAG next performs secure text aggregation for a robust output. Notably, we design algorithms that can aggregate unstructured texts in a certifiably robust manner; we present keyword-based aggregation in Section III-B and decoding-based aggregation in Section III-C.

<!-- image -->

Evaluation. We extensively experimented with three datasets, RealtimeQA [21], Natural Questions [22], and Biography Generation [29], and three LLMs, Mistral-7B [19], Llama2-7B [35], and GPT-3.5 [7]. RobustRAG achieves substantial certifiable robustness while maintaining high clean performance, e.g., 71% clean accuracy and 38% certifiable robust accuracy on the RealtimeQA dataset, compared to 69% clean accuracy and no certifiable accuracy for vanilla RAG. Additionally, RobustRAG also demonstrates strong empirical robustness against PoisonedRAG [45] and indirect prompt injection attacks [16], reducing attack success rates from over 90% to approximately 10%.

Contributions. (1) We propose RobustRAG as the first certifiably robust defense framework against retrieval corruption attacks, built around the core insight of an isolate-thenaggregate strategy. (2) We design two secure text aggregation techniques to instantiate RobustRAG and demonstrate their certifiable robustness against retrieval corruption attacks, which is the first of its kind for free-form text generation. (3) We demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of RobustRAG across three datasets, covering tasks of open-domain question answering and free-form long text generation, and three LLMs, including both open-weight and API-only models.

## II. BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES

In this section, we introduce the background of retrievalaugmented generation (Section II-A), discuss retrieval corrup- tion attacks (Section II-B), formulate robustness objectives (Section II-C), and explain the concept of robustness certification (Section II-D).

## A. RAG Overview

RAG pipeline. We denote text instruction as i (e.g., 'answer the query using the retrieved passages' ), text query as q (e.g., 'what is the name of the highest mountain?' ), and retrieved text passage as p (e.g., 'Mount Everest is known as Earth's highest mountain above sea level' ).

Given a query q , a vanilla RAG pipeline operates in two phases: (1) retrieval phase , which retrieves the k most relevant passages ( p 1 , . . . , p k ) := P k from an external knowledge base; (2) generation phase , which uses the instruction, query, and passages to prompt an LLM model and get response r = LLM ( i ⊕ q ⊕P k ) := LLM ( i ⊕ q ⊕ p 1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ p k ) , where ⊕ is the text concatenation operator. We will call LLM ( · ) to obtain different forms of predictions: we use LLM gen to denote the text response, LLM prob to denote the next-token probability distribution vector, and LLM token to denote the predicted next token. We primarily focus on greedy decoding as it enables deterministic robustness analysis.

RAG evaluation metric. We use M ( · ) to denote an evaluation function. Given an LLM response r and reference answer a , the function M ( r , a ) outputs a quality metric score (higher scores indicate better performance). Different tasks usually use different metrics: for question answering, M ( · ) can output a binary score from { 0 , 1 } indicating the correctness of the response; for long-form text generation, M ( · ) can produce a score using heuristics like LLM-as-a-judge [43].

Example of RAG application: web search. A common RAG application is in enhancing web search. Given a user query, a search engine first retrieves a set of relevant web pages. An LLM then processes these pages to generate a concise answer, sparing the user from reading through all the content. This paradigm supports popular products such as Microsoft Bing Chat [28], Perplexity AI [3], Google Search AI Overview [14], and ChatGPT search [30]. Throughout this paper, we will use web search as a motivating application example for RobustRAG.

## B. Retrieval Corruption Attack

In this paper, we study retrieval corruption attacks against RAG: the attacker can control a fraction of the retrieved passages to induce inaccurate responses.

Attacker capability. We allow the attacker to arbitrarily manipulate the content and ranking positions of up to k ′ malicious passages, i.e., corrupting the retrieval outcome.

Furthermore, we categorize retrieval corruption attacks into passage injection and passage modification . The former can inject k ′ malicious passages, but cannot modify the content and relative ranking of benign passages; the latter can arbitrarily modify the content and ranking positions of k ′ original benign passages. In this paper, our presentation will focus primarily on passage injection because it is a popular setting used by many attacks [45, 44, 12, 31, 32]; we will use 'corruption' and 'injection' interchangeably when the context is clear. In Appendix A-C, we further quantitatively demonstrate RobustRAG's robustness against passage modification .

Finally, we allow the attacker to know everything about our defenses and RAG pipeline, including defense algorithms and parameters, LLM architectures and weights, knowledge base, and even user queries. The attacker can leverage all this knowledge to construct k ′ most malicious passages to induce inaccurate RAG responses with low quality scores.

Notation. Formally, given the original (benign) topk retrieved passages P k , we use P ′ k to denote the corrupted retrieval result, and r ′ := LLM ( i ⊕ q ⊕ P ′ k ) to denote the response under attack. Additionally, we use A ( P k , k ′ ) to denote the set of all possible retrieval P ′ k when k ′ malicious passages are injected into the original retrieval P k (and eject k ′ benign passages from topk ). The attacker aims to construct malicious P ′ k ∈ A ( P k , k ′ ) to minimize the response quality score, i.e., arg min P ′ k M ( r ′ , a ) s.t. r ′ = LLM ( i ⊕ q ⊕P ′ k ) , P ′ k ∈ A ( P k , k ′ ) .

Example of retrieval corruption in web search. In LLMenhanced web search, an attacker may launch malicious websites and use techniques like SEO to push them into the top search results. In such cases, the number of corrupted passages k ′ is typically small because the retriever (i.e., the search engine) is trusted, and it is unlikely that an attacker can compromise all top-ranked websites. However, even a small number of malicious webpages can still hijack the final response [6], highlighting the need for a robust RAG algorithm.

## C. Robustness Formulation

In this subsection, we present the robustness objective and definition, followed by a discussion on when achieving robustness is (im)possible.

Robustness objective. In this paper, we study the question: how can we generate an accurate and robust response when a fraction of retrieved passages are maliciously corrupted? That is, we focus on robustness of the generation phase within the RAG pipeline, while conservatively assuming that the attacker can arbitrarily manipulate the ranking positions of k ′ malicious passages during the retrieval phase.

Robustness definition. We define the defense robustness (for each query) as the lower bound of the LLM response quality when under attack, formally presented as follows.

Definition 1 ( τ -robustness) . Given a task instruction i , a RAG query q , the benign topk retrieved passages P k , an LLMbased defense procedure LLM def that returns text responses, an evaluation metric M , a reference answer a , and an attacker A ( P k , k ′ ) who can arbitrarily inject k ′ malicious passages, the defense LLM defense has τ -robustness if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, τ serves as a lower bound on model robustness against all possible attackers who can inject k ′ passages with any content into any position and can have full knowledge of our defense, LLM, knowledge base, and the RAG query (recall Section II-B). We will use (the largest) τ as the robustness measure for each query q .

For simplicity, we consider the quality score returned by M ( · ) to be always non-negative. Then, τ -robustness with τ = 0 is trivial for any defense and query, and we need to design defenses to achieve non-zero τ . However, we note that non-trivial robustness can sometimes become fundamentally impossible, e.g., when the number of corrupted passages k ′ is extremely large, and we need to understand the limit of achievable robustness before designing a defense algorithm.

Feasibility of robust response. Given a query and k retrieved passages, we can categorize passages into three groups: (1) useful benign passages with useful information to the query, (2) noisy benign passages without useful or malicious content, and (3) malicious passages with malicious content. Since we allow strong attackers with arbitrary control over the content of malicious passages, the robust generation problem is tractable and meaningful only when useful benign passages outnumber malicious ones . Otherwise, even humans cannot provide an accurate response solely based on retrieved passages. 1

In practice, given a knowledge base, the number of useful benign passages can vary across different queries. If we consider a fixed attacker budget, i.e., the number of malicious passages k ′ , robustness may be impossible for some queries (whose number of useful benign passages is smaller than k ′ ). In our algorithm design, we do not attempt to achieve non-trivial robustness (non-zero τ ) for these queries, as it is beyond the fundamental limit on generation-phase robustness.

1 We consider the prior knowledge of humans/LLMs is unavailable or unreliable; otherwise, it is unnecessary to evoke the RAG process. Additionally, auxiliary information, such as ranking and timestamp is susceptible to manipulation [44, 45]; we do not consider it as reliable information.

Evaluation focus. To ensure the robust text generation problem remains meaningful for most queries in our experiments, our evaluation primarily focuses on small k ′ , e.g., k ′ = 1 with k = 10 . We note that this smallk ′ setting is (1) practical in realworld applications like web search (recall Section II-B), and (2) still an open research question as no strong (certifiable) defenses exist even for a small k ′ = 1 . Despite the evaluation focus on small k ′ , we will also demonstrate RobustRAG's non-trivial robustness against larger k ′ in Section V-D.

## D. Robustness Certification

Section II-C discussed that we can use τ as the robustness measure. However, a remaining challenge is: how can we compute or estimate the value of τ for each query?

Common pitfall in τ estimation. A straightforward strategy is to empirically attack the defense model and take the defense performance (quality score) as an estimate of τ . However, this estimation can be overly optimistic and thus incorrect if we use a suboptimal attack. There have been countless examples where stronger adaptive attacks invalidate the robustness claims made by many defenses [8, 5]-a common pitfall in AI security.

Objective: certifiable τ computation. This paper aims to develop algorithms for which we can compute correct τ values with provable and certifiable guarantees . We call this process of computing certifiable τ values robustness certification ; 2 we sometimes refer to Definition 1 as ' τ -certifiable robustness' to emphasize the certifiable nature of robustness.

Challenges of robustness certification. As implied by Definition 1, the robustness certification algorithm must measure the quality of the worst possible response r ′ ∈ R ′ when our defense LLM def is prompted with arbitrary k ′ -corrupted retrieval P ′ k ∈ A ( P k , k ′ ) . The key challenge is that, the attacker set A ( P k , k ′ ) contains infinitely many possibilities for P ′ k because the injected passages can have arbitrary content and can be generated with arbitrary attack algorithms (leveraging full knowledge of the defense, LLM, knowledge base, and user query). As a result, the response set R ′ can become infinitely large and intractable to analyze its worst response. One key contribution of this paper is to carefully design the RobustRAG algorithm to limit the attacker's influence so that R ′ becomes tractable for certifiable robustness analysis.

Example usage of robustness certification. To illustrate the usage of certification techniques, consider a questionanswering dataset where the evaluation function M ( · ) returns 1 for a correct answer and 0 otherwise. Given a well-designed certification algorithm, we can compute a binary τ value for each query (for a specific k ′ ) and report the average τ as the certifiable robust accuracy. For example, a certifiable robust accuracy of 80% guarantees that RobustRAG consistently produces correct answers for 80% of queries (from this dataset), regardless of how an attacker corrupts up to k ′ passages per query. This metric is attack-agnostic and provides a lower bound on model accuracy under such corruption, making it a reliable benchmark for tracking robustness progress on the data distribution represented by this dataset.

2 Most existing works on robustness certification [10, 15, 42, 40] focus on classification. They can be viewed as a special case of Definition 1 with the evaluation function M ( · ) outputting a binary score from { 0 , 1 } indicating the correctness of classification.

## III. ROBUSTRAG: A DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

In this section, we first present an overview of our RobustRAG framework and then discuss the algorithm details. The algorithm design targets certifiable robustness; we will present robustness certification algorithms in Section IV.

RobustRAG insights. Our key insight is an isolate-thenaggregate strategy (Figure 1). Given a set of retrieved passages, we first isolate them into disjoint groups, generate isolated LLM responses based on the concatenated passages from each group, and then securely aggregate these isolated responses for final output. With proper isolation design (Secion III-A), a small number of corrupted passages can only affect a small fraction of passage groups and isolated responses. This lays a foundation for certifiable robustness, allowing us to recover accurate responses from other unaffected passage groups.

RobustRAG challenges. The primary challenge of RobustRAG lies in designing secure text aggregation techniques. First , unlike classification tasks where possible outputs are predefined, text responses from LLMs can be highly unstructured. For example, given the query 'what is the name of the highest mountain?' , valid responses include 'Mount Everest' , 'Sagarmatha' , and 'Everest is the highest' . We need flexible aggregation techniques to handle different forms of text responses. Second , though we have isolated the adversarial impact to individual responses, malicious responses generated from corrupted passages can still interfere with the aggregation process. Therefore, we need to design secure aggregation techniques that limit the influence of malicious responses so that we can we can formally analyze and certify the worst-case robustness. To overcome these challenges, we propose two aggregation algorithms.

- 1) Secure keyword aggregation (Section III-B): extracting keywords from each response and using high-frequency keywords to prompt the LLM again for the final response.
- 2) Secure decoding aggregation (Section III-C): securely aggregating next-token prediction vectors from different isolated passage groups at each decoding step.

## A. Passage Isolation

In this subsection, we discuss our passage isolation design. Given k retrieved passages P k = ( p 1 , . . . , p k ) , we isolate them into disjoint passage groups, denoted as G m = ( g 1 , . . . , g m ) , where each g j represents the concatenation of passages from the j th group. Specifically, we group ω adjacent passages ( ω is a defense parameter) to get m := ⌈ k ω ⌉ disjoint groups as G m := { g j = p ω · ( j -1)+1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ p min( jω,k ) | 1 ≤ j ≤ ⌈ k ω ⌉} ; we use G m ← ISOGROUP ( P k , ω ) to denote this operation. Furthermore, we use m ′ to denote the number of passage groups with corrupted passages. We have m ′ ≤ k ′ because each passage only appears in one passage group; m ′ reaches its maximum value k ′ when each passage group only contains one malicious passage. The robustness of RobustRAG relies on the other m -m ′ benign passage groups.

Fig. 2. Illustration of keyword aggregation. We extract unique keywords from each isolated response and aggregate keyword counts. Then, we prompt the LLM with only keywords with large counts for a final response.

<!-- image -->

Remark. The group size ω is an important parameter that balances the trade-off between robustness and utility. A larger ω is more likely to provide high-quality responses as each isolated response is based on more passages. However, a large ω reduces the number of passage group m = ⌈ k ω ⌉ . If m is too small, the corrupted passage groups can outnumber benign passage groups ( m ′ &gt; m -m ′ ), making certifiable robustness impossible. For example, if we reduce RobustRAG to vanilla RAG by setting ω = k , we have m = ⌈ k ω ⌉ = 1 , and even one corrupted passage can manipulate RAG outputs.

## B. Secure Keyword Aggregation

Overview. For free-form text generation (e.g., open-domain QA), simple techniques like majority voting perform poorly because they cannot recognize texts like 'Mount Everest' and 'The highest mountain is named Everest' as the same answer. To address this challenge, we propose a keyword aggregation technique (see Figure 2 for a toy example): we extract keywords from each isolated LLM response, aggregate keyword counts across different responses, and ask the same LLM to answer the query using keywords with large counts (without any retrieved passages). This approach allows us to distill and aggregate information across unstructured text responses. We only consider unique keywords from each response so that the attacker can only increase keyword counts by a small number, i.e., m ′ , instead of arbitrarily manipulating keyword counts.

Inference algorithm. We present the pseudocode of secure keyword aggregation in Algorithm 1. First, we isolate k passages P k into m passage groups G m using the procedure ISOGROUP ( · , ω ) discussed in Section III-A (Line 2). Second, we initialize an empty keyword counter C to track keywordcount pairs ( w , c ) and a zero integer counter n (Line 3). Then, we iterate over each passage group (which can be done in parallel to optimize runtime). For each passage group g j , we prompt the LLM with the instruction i 1 = 'answer the query given retrieved passages, say 'I don't know' if no relevant information found' and query q , and get response r j = LLM gen ( i 1 ⊕ q ⊕ g j ) (Line 5). If 'I don't know' is not in the response, we increment the integer count n by one to track the number of non-abstained responses (Line 7). Then, we extract a set of unique keywords W j from each response

## Algorithm 1 RobustRAG with secure keyword aggregation

Require: retrieval P k = ( p 1 , . . . , p k ) , passage group size ω , query q , model LLM , thresholds α ∈ [0 , 1] , β ∈ Z + Instructions: i 1 = 'answer the query given retrieved passages, say 'I don't know' if no relevant information found' ; i 2 = 'answer the query using provided keywords' procedure )

```
1: RRAG-KEYWORD 2: G m ← ISOGROUP ( P k , ω ) 3: C ← COUNTER () , n ← 0 4: for j ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . , |G m |} do 5: r j ← LLM gen ( i 1 ⊕ q ⊕ g j ) 6: if 'I don't know' ̸∈ r j then 7: n ← n +1 8: W j ← GETUNIQKEYWORDS ( r j 9: Update counter C with W j 10: end if 11: end for 12: µ ← min( α · n, β ) 13: W ∗ ←{ w | ( w , c ) ∈ C , c ≥ µ } 14: r ∗ ← LLM gen ( i 2 ⊕ q ⊕ SORTED ( W ∗ )) 15: return r ∗ 16: end procedure
```

r j (Line 8) and update the keyword counter C accordingly (Line 9). The procedure GETUNIQKEYWORDS ( · ) in Line 8 extracts keywords and keyphrases from text strings between adjacent 'uninformative words' (such as 'but' and 'then'; more details in Appendix B). We note that we only count unique keywords from each response to prevent the attacker from arbitrarily increasing keyword counts. After examining every isolated response, we filter out keywords whose counts are smaller than a threshold µ . We set the filtering threshold µ = min( α · n, β ) , where α ∈ [0 , 1] , β ∈ Z + are two defense parameters (Line 12). When n is large (many nonabstained responses), the threshold is dominated by β ; when n is small, we reduce the threshold from β to α · n to avoid filtering out all keywords. Given the retained keyword set W ∗ (Line 13), we sort the keywords alphabetically and then combine them with instruction i 2 = 'answer the query using provided keywords' and query q to prompt LLM to get the final response r ∗ = LLM gen ( i 2 ⊕ q ⊕ SORTED ( W ∗ )) (Line 14).

## C. Secure Decoding Aggregation

Overview. Keyword aggregation only requires LLM responses and thus applies to any LLM. It works particularly well for short responses (e.g., few-token answers); however, its keyword extraction step can lose valuable information for longer responses (e.g., paragraph-length biography). To address this limitation, we introduce an alternative: secure decoding aggregation , which operates during the decoding phase. We illustrate the algorithm in Figure 3: at each decoding step, we aggregate next-token probability vectors predicted from different isolated passage groups and make a robust prediction accordingly. Since each probability value is bounded within

Fig. 3. Illustration of decoding aggregation. We make next-token predictions from different isolated passages and aggregate their probability vectors. Then, we select the next token based on the aggregated vector (Line 9-14 of Algorithm 2) and repeat this process to get a full response.

<!-- image -->

[0 , 1] , malicious passages only have limited influence on the aggregated probability vector.

Inference algorithm. We present the pseudocode in Algorithm 2. First, we isolate passages into groups G m (details in Section III-A) and initialize an empty string r ∗ to store robust response (Line 2). Second, we identify isolated passages for which the LLM is unlikely to output 'I don't know' (Line 3). Next, we start the decoding phase. At each decoding step, we first get isolated next-token probability vectors v j = LLM prob ( i ⊕ q ⊕ g j ⊕ r ∗ ) (Line 6). Then, we element-wisely add all vectors together to get the vector ˆ v (Line 8). To make a robust next-token prediction based on the vector ˆ v , we obtain its top-2 tokens t 1 , t 2 with the highest (summed) probability p 1 , p 2 (Line 9). If the probability difference p 1 -p 2 is larger than a predefined threshold η , we consider the prediction to be confident and choose the top-1 token t 1 as the next token t ∗ (Line 11). Otherwise, we consider the prediction to be indecisive, and choose the token predicted without any retrieval as the next token t ∗ (Line 13). Finally, we append the predicted token t ∗ to the response string r ∗ (Line 15) and repeat this process until we reach the limit of the maximum number of new tokens (or hit an EOS token) to get our final response r ∗ .

For long-form text generation, we found greater success in certifying robustness (see Section IV-C) with η &gt; 0 : noretrieval tokens are immune to retrieval corruption and do not significantly hurt generation quality as many tokens can be inferred from sentence coherence. For tasks with shorter responses (a few tokens), we set η = 0 because sentence coherence and no-retrieval tokens become less helpful.

## IV. ROBUSTNESS CERTIFICATION

In this section, we discuss how to perform robustness certification (recall Section II-D). For the ease of understanding, we will focus on a simplified setting with group size ω = 1 (so we have m = k, m ′ = k ′ , G m = P k , g j = p j ). This will cover the key ideas of certification algorithms, and we will generalize it to larger ω in Appendix A-B.

We will start with an overview and a warm-up example in Section IV-A, followed by certification algorithms for our keyword aggregation (Section IV-B) and decoding aggregation

## Algorithm 2 RobustRAG with secure decoding aggregation

Require: retrieved data P k = ( p 1 , . . . , p k ) , passage group size ω , query q , model LLM , filtering threshold γ , probability threshold η , max number of new tokens T max

Instruction: i = 'answer the query given retrieved passages, say 'I don't know' if no relevant information found'

```
1: procedure RRAG-DECODING 2: G m ← ISOGROUP ( P k , ω ) , r ∗ ← '' 3: J ← { j | Pr LLM [ 'I don't know' | i ⊕ q ⊕ g j ] < γ, g j ∈ G m } 4: for t ∈ { 1 , . . . , T max } do 5: for j ∈ J do 6: v j ← LLM prob ( i ⊕ q ⊕ g j ⊕ r ∗ ) 7: end for 8: ˆ v ← VEC-SUM ( { v j | j ∈ J } ) 9: ( t 1 , p 1 ) , ( t 2 , p 2 ) ← TOP2TOKENS (ˆ v ) 10: if p 1 -p 2 > η then 11: t ∗ ← t 1 12: else 13: t ∗ ← LLM token ( 'answer query' ⊕ q ⊕ r ∗ ) 14: end if 15: r ∗ ← r ∗ ⊕ t ∗ 16: end for 17: return r ∗ 18: end procedure
```

(Section IV-C), and conclude with remarks on the usage of certification procedures (Section IV-D).

## A. Certification Overview

Certification objective. Given a RAG query q , the robustness certification procedure aims to determine the (largest) τ that satisfies τ -robustness (Definition 1). Toward this objective, the certification procedure will analyze all possible RobustRAG responses r when an attacker can arbitrarily inject k ′ malicious passages to the topk retrieval P k . Let R be the set of all possible RobustRAG responses r . We will show that, thanks to our RobustRAG design, R is a finite set. This allows us to measure the worst-case performance/robustness as τ = min r ∈R ( M ( r , a )) , where a is the reference answer.

Understanding LLM inputs. To analyze all possible LLM outputs, we need to first understand possible LLM inputs (i.e., possible passages/groups). Recall that the attacker injects k ′ passage to the retrieval result (Section II-B); these k ′ injected passages can only eject the bottom k ′ benign passages { p k -k ′ +1 , . . . , p k } from the original retrieval result P k . Therefore, the top k -k ′ benign passages { p 1 , . . . , p k -k ′ } remain unchanged in the corrupted retrieval set P ′ k , regardless of the content and ranking of injected passages. 3 Our robustness certification (with group size ω = 1 ) will be based on these top k -k ′ benign passages { p 1 , . . . , p k -k ′ } := P k -k ′ .

3 Appendix A-C discusses passage modification that can eject/modify any k ′ passages instead of the bottom k ′ .

Warm-up example: majority voting. We can first use majority voting for classification as a warm-up example to understand the certification workflow.

Consider a RAG pipeline is built for multiple-choice question-answering, where the output space is small and predefined. A simple aggregation strategy is to output the answer with the highest votes among k isolated predictions (majority voting). To analyze its robustness given k -k ′ benign passages we can get k -k ′ classification outputs and gather their voting counts. If the voting count difference between the winner and runner-up is larger than k ′ , the final response can only be the voting winner r ∗ , regardless of the content and position of the k ′ corrupted passage groups. This is because the attacker can only increase the runner-up count by k ′ (using k ′ malicious passage groups), which is not enough for the runner-up to beat the winner. Therefore, we have R = { r ∗ } and thus we can compute τ = M ( r ∗ , a ) ∈ { 0 , 1 } in this case. On the other hand, if the voting count difference is not large enough, we have no guarantees on the output; the certification procedure should return τ = 0 , i.e., zero robustness.

## B. Certifying Keyword Aggregation

Intuition. Similar to majority voting, we analyze the k -k ′ benign responses made from k -k ′ benign passages. We first extract keywords and get their counts as discussed in Section III-B. We next analyze which keywords might appear in the retained keyword set W ∗ (Line 13 of Algorithm 1). Intuitively, keywords with large counts will always appear in W ∗ while keywords with small counts can never be in W ∗ . As a result, the attacker can only manipulate the appearance of keywords with 'medium' counts. When the set of mediumcount keywords is small (e.g., smaller than 15), we can enumerate all its possible subsets and generate all possible retained keyword set W ∗ accordingly (by combining largecount and medium-count keywords). Finally, we compute all possible responses r from all possible W ∗ and let them form a response set R -we have τ = min r ∈R M ( r , a ) .

Certification algorithm. We provide the certification pseudocode for keyword aggregation in Algorithm 3. It aims to determine the τ value in τ -certifiable robustness for a given query q , benign passages P k -k ′ , the number of corrupted passages k ′ , and given defense/attack settings. We state its correctness as follows.

Theorem 1. Given benign passages P k , number of corrupted passages k ′ , query q , model LLM , group size ω = 1 , filtering thresholds α, β , and reference answer a , Algorithm 3 can correctly return the τ value for τ -certifiable robustness for the inference procedure RRAGKEYWORD discussed in Algorithm 1, i.e., M ( r , a ) ≥ τ, ∀ r ∈ R := { RRAG-KEYWORD ( i , q , P ′ k , LLM , ω = 1 , α, β ) | ∀ P ′ k ∈ A ( P k , k ′ ) } .

Proof. We prove the theorem by first explaining Algorithm 3. We provide a toy example in Figure 4 to aid our discussion.

First, the certification procedure extracts keywords and get their counts from the k -k ′ responses computed from benign

```
Algorithm 3 Certification procedure for keyword aggregation Require: Benign passages P k -k ′ , number of corrupted passages k ′ , query q , model LLM , filtering thresholds α ∈ [0 , 1] , β ∈ Z + , reference answer a . Instructions: i 1 = ' answer the query given retrieved passages, say 'I don't know' if no relevant information found '; i 2 = ' answer the query using provided keywords ' 1: C ← COUNTER () , n ← 0 2: for j ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . , k -k ′ } do 3: r j ← LLM gen ( i 1 ⊕ q ⊕ p j ) 4: if ' I don't know ' ̸∈ r j then 5: W j ← GETUNIQKEYWORDS ( r j ) 6: Update counter C with W j 7: n ← n +1 8: end if 9: end for 10: R←{} 11: for k ′ effective ∈ { 0 , 1 , . . . , k ′ } do 12: µ ′ ← min( α · ( n + k ′ effective ) , β ) 13: W A ←{ w | ( w , c ) ∈ C , c ≥ µ ′ } 14: W C ←{ w | ( w , c ) ∈ C , µ ′ > c ≥ µ ′ -k ′ effective } 15: for W ′ C ∈ P ( W C ) do 16: W ′ ←W A ⋃ W ′ C 17: r ← LLM gen ( i 2 ⊕ q ⊕ SORTED ( W ′ )) 18: R←R ⋃ { r } 19: end for 20: end for 21: τ ← min r ∈R M ( r , a ) 22: return τ
```

passage groups (Lines 1-9). The keyword extraction process is identical to the inference algorithm discussed in Algorithm 1.

Then, the certification procedure initializes an empty response set R to collect all possible responses (Line 10). Since the attacker might introduce arbitrary numbers of non-abstained malicious responses (responses without ' I don't know '), we denote this number as k ′ effective and will enumerate all possible cases k ′ effective ∈ { 0 , 1 , . . . , k ′ } .

For each k ′ effective , we first compute the corresponding threshold µ ′ = min( α · ( n + k ′ effective ) , β ) , where n is the number of non-abstained responses from k -k ′ benign passages (Line 12). Given the threshold µ ′ , we can divide all keywords into three groups (a toy example is in Figure 4).

- 1) The first group W A contains keywords with counts no smaller than µ ′ . Keywords from this group will always be in the retained keyword set W ∗ because the injection attacker cannot decrease their counts.
- 2) The second group W B contains keywords with counts smaller than µ ′ -k ′ effective . These keywords will never appear in the final keyword set W ∗ because the attacker can only increase their counts by k ′ effective .
- 3) The third group W C contains keywords whose counts are within [ µ ′ -k ′ effective , µ ′ ) . The attacker can arbitrarily decide if these keywords will appear in the retained keyword set.

Fig. 4. Visual example of keyword certification. One out of three passages is corrupted, and the attack can introduce any word to the corrupted keyword set. (1) Words from W A (with counts larger than or equal to µ ′ = 2 ) will always be retained. (2) Words from W B (with counts smaller than µ ′ -k ′ effective = 1 ) will always be filtered; therefore, malicious keywords like 'Fuji' can never affect RobustRAG output. (3) Words from W C with medium counts will be retained if the malicious keyword set contains the same words; therefore, the attacker has arbitrary control over their appearance. We can generate all possible retained keyword sets by enumerating the power set of W C (and combining them with the keyword set W A ). Given all possible retained keyword sets, we can prompt the LLM to generate all possible responses R .

<!-- image -->

We then generate keyword sets W A and W C accordingly (Lines 13-14). Note that we do not need W B for certification as it will not be part of the retained keyword set. Next, we enumerate all possible keyword sets from the power set W ′ C ∈ P ( W c ) . For each W ′ C , we generate retained keyword set W ′ = W A ⋃ W ′ C (Line 16), obtain the corresponding response r = LLM gen ( i 2 ⊕ q ⊕ SORTED ( W ′ )) (Line 17), and add this response to the response set (Line 18).

After we enumerate all possible k ′ effective and all possible retained keyword set W ′ . The set R contains all possible LLM responses. We call the evaluation metric function M ( · ) and get the lowest score as the certified τ value (Line 21).

In summary, the certification procedure has considered all possible responses and returns the lowest evaluation metric score. Therefore, the returned value is the correct τ value for certifiable robustness.

Implementation details. When the keyword power set P ( W C ) is too large and costly to enumerate (e.g., 2 15 with |W C | &gt; 15 ), we conservatively consider the certification fails and return τ = 0 , i.e., zero-certifiable robustness.

## C. Certifying Decoding Aggregation

Intuition. We aim to analyze all possible next-token predictions at every decoding step. Given a partial response at a certain decoding step, we first compute next-token probability vectors predicted on k -k ′ benign passage groups and calculate the probability sum of each token. Next, we identify the top-2 tokens with the largest probability sums and compute their probability difference as δ . We will use this δ value to analyze possible next-token predictions. Intuitively, a large δ always leads to the top-1 token being predicted; a medium δ allows for predictions of either the top-1 token or the no-retrieval token; when δ is small, the prediction can be any malicious token introduced by the attacker. We start our certification with an empty string and track all possible next-token predictions Algorithm 4 Certification procedure for decoding aggregation Require: Benign passages P k -k ′ , number of corrupted passages k ′ , query q , model LLM , threshold γ , probability threshold η , max number of new tokens T max, reference answer a .

Instruction: i = ' answer the query given retrieved passages,

```
say 'I don't know' if no relevant information found ' 1: R←{} , X ← STACK ( { '' } ) 2: J ← { j | Pr LLM [ ' I don't know ' | i ⊕ q ⊕ p j ] < γ, p j ∈ P k -k ′ } 3: while X is not empty do 4: ˆ r ←X . POP () 5: if LEN (ˆ r ) ≥ T max then 6: R←R ⋃ { ˆ r } 7: continue 8: end if 9: ˆ v ← VEC-SUM ( { v j | v j = LLM prob ( i ⊕ q ⊕ p j ⊕ r ∗ ) , j ∈ J} ) 10: ( t a , A ) , ( t b , B ) ← TOP2TOKENS (ˆ v ) 11: t nor ← LLM token ( ' answer query ' ⊕ q ⊕ ˆ r ) 12: if A -B > η + k ′ then 13: X . PUSH (ˆ r ⊕ t a ) 14: else if ( η + k ′ ≥ A -B > | η -k ′ | ) then 15: X . PUSH (ˆ r ⊕ t a ); X . PUSH (ˆ r ⊕ t nor ) 16: else if ( η -k ′ ≥ A -B > 0) then 17: X . PUSH (ˆ r ⊕ t nor ) 18: else 19: return 0 20: end if 21: end while 22: τ ← min r ∈R M ( r , a ) 23: return τ
```

(and partial responses) at different decoding steps. If δ is never 'small' when we finish decoding all possible responses; we can obtain a finite set of all possible responses R -we have τ = min r ∈R M ( r , a ) .

Certification algorithm. We present the pseudocode in Algorithm 4. It aims to determine the τ value in τ -certifiable robustness for a given query q , benign passages P k -k ′ , the number of corrupted passages k ′ , and given defense/attack settings. We state its correctness as follows.

Theorem 2. Given benign passages P k , number of corrupted passages k ′ , query q , model LLM , group size ω = 1 , filtering thresholds γ , probability threshold η , max number of new tokens T max, and reference answer a , Algorithm 4 can correctly return the τ value for τ -certifiable robustness for the inference procedure RRAG-DECODING discussed in Algorithm 2, i.e., M ( r , a ) ≥ τ, ∀ r ∈ R := { RRAG-DECODING ( i , q , P ′ k , LLM , ω = 1 , γ, η, T max ) | ∀ P ′ k ∈ A ( P k , k ′ ) } .

Proof. We prove the theorem by first explaining Algorithm 4. First, we initialize an empty response set R to hold all possible responses and a stack X with an empty string to track possible partial responses (Line 1). Then, we get the indices of benign passage groups that are unlikely to output ' I don't know ' (Line 2). We will repeat the following robustness analysis until the stack is empty. At each analysis step, we pop a partial response ˆ r from the stack X (Line 4). If it has reached the maximum number of generated tokens (or ends with an EOS token), we add this response ˆ r to the response set R (Line 6). Otherwise, we get the probability sum vector ˆ v from benign passages (Line 9) and its top-2 tokens t a , t b and their probability sums A,B (Line 10). We also get the no-retrieval prediction token as t nor (Line 11).

Next, we analyze all possible next-token predictions at this decoding step. Our discussions are based on the probability gap between A and B , i.e., A -B . We can have the following three lemmas. We leave their proofs in Appendix A.

Lemma 1. If A -B &gt; η + k ′ is true, the algorithm will always predict the top-1 t a .

Lemma 2. If η + k ′ ≥ A -B &gt; | η -k ′ | is true, the algorithm might predict the top-1 token t a or the no-retrieval token t nor , but not any other token.

Lemma 3. If η -k ′ ≥ A -B &gt; 0 is true, the algorithm will always predict the no-retrieval token t nor .

With these three lemmas, we can go back to the certification procedure in Algorithm 4. We have four cases in total.

- 1) Case 1 : A -B &gt; η + k ′ (Line 12). Lemma 1 ensures that the next token is the top-1 token t a ; thus, we push ˆ r ⊕ t a to the stack X (Line 13).
- 2) Case 2 : η + k ′ ≥ A -B &gt; | η -k ′ | (Line 14). Lemma 2 ensures that the next token is either top-1 token t a or noretrieval token t nor, which is under the attacker's control; we push both ˆ r ⊕ t a and ˆ r ⊕ t nor to X (Line 15).
- 3) Case 3 : η -k ′ ≥ A -B &gt; 0 (Line 16). Lemma 3 ensures that the next token is the no-retrieval token t nor; thus, we push ˆ r ⊕ t nor to X (Line 17).
- 4) Case 4 : other cases. We cannot claim any robustness about the next-token prediction: the response set becomes intractable, and the robustness certification fails. Therefore, the algorithm aborts and returns τ = 0 , i.e., zero-certifiable robustness (Line 19).

Finally, if the response set R is still tractable (no Case 4 happens) when the stack X becomes empty, we return τ as the worst evaluation score min r ∈R M ( r , a ) (Line 22).

In summary, Algorithm 4 considers all possible responses and returns the lowest evaluation metric score-the returned value is the correct τ value for certifiable robustness.

We note that the entire certification process can be viewed as a binary tree generation, where each next-token prediction is a tree node. We provide a toy example in Figure 5 (see figure caption for more details).

Implementation details. The number of possible responses |R| can sometimes become very large ( &gt; 10 3 ) when Case 2 happens frequently. In a small subset of our experiments, we sample a random subset ˆ R (of size 100) from the large response set R and approximate the τ value as ˆ τ = min r ∈ ˆ R M ( r , a ) , due to the high financial and computational cost when using LLMas-a-judge as evaluator M ( · ) . These approximated robustness numbers will be marked with ‡ in Section V.

Fig. 5. Visual example of decoding certification. The certification process can be viewed as a binary tree generation process, where each token corresponds to a tree node. We start with the BOS token (root node) and analyze the next-token prediction at each decoding step. If we hit Case 2, we branch out with two nodes (top-1 token and no-retrieval token); if we hit Case 1 or Case 3, we append the top-1 or no-retrieval token accordingly; if we hit Case 4, the certification fails, and algorithms aborts with τ = 0 (zero certifiable robustness). If we finish the tree generation (end with EOS tokens or reach the maximum number of newly generated tokens), each root-to-leaf path corresponds to one possible LLM response. We compute τ as the lowest evaluation score from all these responses.

<!-- image -->

## D. Remark: Certifiable Evaluation

So far, we have discussed certification algorithms for different text aggregation techniques. The certification algorithms allow us to analyze the response set R to determine the τ value of τ -certifiable robustness for a given query q and its reference answer a . In our evaluation, we gather a dataset of queries and answers ( q , a ) , calculate the τ value for each query, and take the averaged τ across different queries as a certifiable evaluation metric of robustness. The evaluated robustness numbers are agnostic to attack algorithms and hold for strong adaptive attacks.

We note that the certification algorithms discussed in this section (Algorithms 3 and 4) are different from the inference algorithms (Algorithms 1 and 2) discussed in Section III. The inference algorithms are the defense algorithms we will deploy in the wild; they aim to generate accurate responses from benign or corrupted retrieval. In contrast, the certification algorithms are designed to certifiably and provably evaluate the robustness of inference algorithms (i.e., computing correct τ ); they operate on benign passages, require the reference answer a (to compute quality scores), and can be computationally expensive (to reason about all possible r ∈ R ).

Finally, our robustness certification is compatible with any evaluation function M . We generate the set R of all possible responses, and M is used solely to compute a quantitative robustness value min r ∈R M ( r , a ) . For long-form text generation, although LLM-as-a-judge is not a perfect evaluator, we will adopt it as it is the most effective automatic option. Nevertheless, our certification remains compatible with any alternative or improved evaluator M (e.g., human evaluation).

## V. EVALUATION

We present the experimental setup in Section V-A, main results of certifiable robustness in Section V-B, empirical attack experiments in Section V-C, and more detailed analysis of RobustRAG in Section V-D.

## A. Experiment Setup

In this section, we discuss our experiment setup; we provide more details in Appendix B.

Datasets. We experiment with four datasets: RealtimeQAMC (RQA-MC) [21] for multiple-choice open-domain QA (a classification task), RealtimeQA (RQA) [21] and Natural Questions (NQ) [22] for short-answer open-domain questionanswering (QA) , and the Biography generation dataset (Bio) [29] for free-form long text generation , which generates a few sentences or paragraphs. We sample 100 queries (50 for Bio) from each dataset for experiments (as certification can be computationally expensive). For each query, we use Google Search to retrieve passages. This is a popular experiment setting [21, 41, 36] and mimics a real-world scenario where malicious webpages are retrieved. We note that our RobustRAG design is agnostic to the choice of retriever.

LLM and RAG settings. We evaluate RobustRAG with three LLMs: Mistral-7B-Instruct [19], Llama2-7B-Chat [35], and GPT-3.5-turbo (deferred to Appendix C). We use in-context learning to guide LLMs to follow instructions. We use the top 10 retrieved passages for generation by default. We use greedy decoding for a deterministic evaluation of certifiable robustness.

RobustRAG setup. We evaluate RobustRAG with two aggregation methods: secure keyword aggregation (Keyword) and secure decoding aggregation (Decoding) . By default, we set k = 10 , ω = 1 , γ = 0 . 99 . For multiple-choice QA (classification), we reduce RobustRAG to majority voting , which was discussed in Section IV. For short-answer QA, we further set α = 0 . 2 , β = 3 , η = 0 . For long-form generation, we set α = 0 . 4 , β = 4 and include two secure decoding instances: one optimized for benign performance ( η = 1 ), denoted by Decoding c , and another for robustness ( η = 4 ), denoted by Decoding r . We chose the default parameters using a held-out validation set and will analyze the impact of different parameters in Section V-D and Appendix C.

Evaluation metrics. For QA tasks , we use the reference answer a to evaluate the correctness of the response. The evaluator M ( · ) returns a score of 1 when the reference answer a appears in the response r , and outputs 0 otherwise. For benign performance evaluation (without any attack), we report the averaged evaluation scores on different queries as benign accuracy (bacc) . For certifiable robustness evaluation, we compute the τ values for different queries and report the averaged τ as the certifiable accuracy (cacc) . For long-form bio generation , we generate a reference response a by prompting GPT-4 with the person's Wikipedia document. We then use GPT-3.5 to build an LLM-as-a-judge evaluator [43] and rate responses with scores ranging from 0 to 100 (bllmj) . For robustness evaluation, we report the τ values as certifiable LLM-judge scores (cllmj) .

## B. Main Evaluation of Certifiable Robustness

In Table I, we report the certifiable robustness and benign performance of RobustRAG with k = 10 passages, isolated by a group size of ω = 1 , against k ′ = 1 malicious passage. We also report performance for LLMs without retrieval (no RAG) and vanilla RAG with no defense (vanilla) .

RobustRAG achieves substantial certifiable robustness across different tasks and models. As shown in Table I, RobustRAG achieves 69.0-71.0% certifiable robust accuracy for RQA-MC, 31.0-38.0% for RQA, 26.0-36.0% for NQ, and 38.8-51.2 certifiable LLM-judge score for the bio generation task. A certifiable accuracy of 71.0% means that for 71.0% of RAG queries, RobustRAG's response will always be correct, even when the attacker knows everything about our framework and can inject anything into one retrieved passage. RobustRAG achieves the fi rst certifiable robustness against any (adaptive) retrieval corruption attack strategy.

RobustRAG maintains high benign performance. Large drops in benign performance have been a significant challenge for certifiably robust defenses. For example, popular certifiably robust classifiers [40, 42, 10] can incur over 10-20% benign accuracy drop on the ImageNet dataset [11]. In contrast, RobustRAG can maintain high benign performance while providing substantial certifiable robustness. For QA tasks, RobustRAG has a minimal impact on benign performance in most cases (compared to vanilla RAG). The only exception is Mistral with secure decoding on RQA (a 7% drop). However, we note that we can minimize this drop with a larger group size ω -Figure 6 demonstrates that we can reduce the benign accuracy drop from 7% to 0% by setting the group size ω = 3 . For the long-form bio generation task, the benign performance drops can be as small as 1.2% (Llama with Decoding c ); the drops are within 10% in most other cases. Finally, we note that RobustRAG performs much better than generation without retrieval (no RAG)-RobustRAG allows us to benefit from retrieval with robustness guarantees.

## C. RobustRAG against Empirical Attacks

In Table II, we analyze the empirical robustness of RobustRAG against prompt injection (PIA) [16] and data poisoning (Poison) [45]. We present the empirical robust accuracy (racc) or robust LLM-judge score (rllmj) against two attacks, as well as the targeted attack success rate (asr) , defined as the percentage of queries for which LLM returns the malicious responses chosen by the attacker. we observe that vanilla RAG pipelines are vulnerable to prompt injection and data poisoning attacks-PIA can have a 90+% attack success rate and degrade the performance below 20%. In contrast, RobustRAG achieves substantial empirical robustness : the attack success rates are ≤ 15% in all cases, with high robust accuracy/score.

## D. Detailed Analysis of RobustRAG

In this section, we use Mistral-7B-Instruct to analyze its defense performance with different parameters. Appendix C provides additional analyses for more models and datasets.

TABLE I ′

| Task         | Model/     | Multiple-choice QA   | Multiple-choice QA   | Short-answer QA   | Short-answer QA   | Short-answer QA   | Short-answer QA   | Long-form generation   | Long-form generation   |
|--------------|------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Dataset      | Defense    | RQA-MC               | RQA-MC               | RQA               | RQA               | NQ                | NQ                | Bio                    | Bio                    |
| LLM          |            | (bacc)               | (cacc)               | (bacc)            | (cacc)            | (bacc)            | (cacc)            | (bllmj)                | (cllmj)                |
| Mistral-I 7B | No RAG     | 9.0                  | -                    | 8.0               | -                 | 30.0              | -                 | 59.4                   | -                      |
| Mistral-I 7B | Vanilla    | 80.0                 | -                    | 69.0              | -                 | 61.0              | -                 | 78.4                   | -                      |
| Mistral-I 7B | Keyword    |                      |                      | 71.0              | 38.0              | 61.0              | 26.0              | 64.8                   | 46.6                   |
| Mistral-I 7B | Decoding c | 81.0 †               | 71.0 †               |                   | 37.0              | 62.0              | 29.0              | 71.2                   | 45.6 ‡                 |
| Mistral-I 7B | Decoding r |                      |                      | 62.0              |                   |                   |                   | 63.4                   | 51.2                   |
| Llama2-C 7B  | No RAG     | 21.0                 | -                    | 2.0               | -                 | 10.0              | -                 | 19.6                   | -                      |
| Llama2-C 7B  | Vanilla    | 79.0                 | -                    | 61.0              | -                 | 57.0              | -                 | 71.8                   | -                      |
| Llama2-C 7B  | Keyword    |                      |                      | 64.0              | 34.0              | 56.0              | 31.0              | 62.2                   | 46.4                   |
| Llama2-C 7B  | Decoding c | 78.0 †               | 69.0 †               | 61.0              | 31.0              | 53.0              | 36.0              | 70.6                   | 38.8 ‡                 |
| Llama2-C 7B  | Decoding r |                      |                      |                   |                   |                   |                   | 62.4                   | 41.6                   |

## CERTIFIABLE ROBUSTNESS AND BENIGN PERFORMANCE OF ROBUSTRAG ( k = 10 , k = 1 ).

(bacc): accuracy; (cacc): certifiable accuracy; (bllmj): LLM-judge score; (cllmj): certifiable LLM-judge score

† For multiple-choice QA, we only have one defense instance that uses majority voting for secure aggregation.

‡ Approximated via subsampling, as discussed at the end of Section IV-C.

## TABLE II

EMPIRICAL ROBUSTNESS OF ROBUSTRAG ( k = 10 , k ′ = 1 ) AGAINST PIA AND POISON ATTACKS.

| Task         |            | Short-form open-domain QA   | Short-form open-domain QA   | Short-form open-domain QA   | Short-form open-domain QA   | Long-form generation   | Long-form generation   |
|--------------|------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Dataset      | Model/     | RQA                         | RQA                         | NQ                          | NQ                          | Bio                    | Bio                    |
| Attack       | Defense    | PIA                         | Poison                      | PIA ↑                       | Poison ↑                    | PIA ↑ / asr            | Poison rllmj ↑ / asr ↓ |
| LLM          |            | racc ↑ / asr ↓              | racc ↑ / asr ↓              | racc / asr ↓                | racc / asr ↓                | rllmj ↓                |                        |
|              | Vanilla    | 5.0 / 66.0                  | 16.0 / 80.0                 | 8.0 / 85.0                  | 41.0 / 37.0                 | 29.0 / 100             | 56.0 / 86.0            |
| Mistral-I 7B | Keyword    | 72.0 / 15.0                 | 72.0 / 15.0                 | 62.0 / 11.0                 | 64.0 / 12.0                 | 64.8 / 0.0             | 61.6 / 0.0             |
| Mistral-I 7B | Decoding c | 57.0 / 5.0                  | 56.0 / 11.0                 | 65.0 / 7.0                  | 63.0 / 7.0                  | 69.8 / 0.0             | 71.0 / 0.0             |
| Llama2-C 7B  | Vanilla    | 1.0 / 97.0                  | 9.0 / 76.0                  | 2.0 / 93.0                  | 33.0 / 38.0                 | 18.2 / 98.0            | 42.4 / 44.0            |
|              | Keyword    | 64.0 / 12.0                 | 64.0 / 11.0                 | 55.0 / 10.0                 | 55.0 / 9.0                  | 59.2 / 0.0             | 63.4 / 0.0             |
|              | Decoding c | 59.0 / 5.0                  | 60.0 / 3.0                  | 51.0 / 6.0                  | 51.0 / 5.0                  | 67.6 / 0.0             | 67.8 / 0.0             |

(racc): empirical robust accuracy; (rllmj): empirical robust LLM-judge score; (asr): targeted attack success rate

Fig. 7. Effect of number of retrieved passages k (RQA)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Impact of passage group size ω . Figure 6 analyzes group sizes ω . As the group size ω increases, the benign performance generally improves, but the certifiable robustness gradually decreases. The parameter ω serves as a knob to systematically balance benign performance and robustness. Notably, with ω = 3 , we reduce the benign performance drop from 7% to 0% while maintaining non-trivial certifiable robustness.

Fig. 8. Effect of corruption size k ′ and keyword filtering thresholds α, β (RQA)

<!-- image -->

rankings) usually carry less additional relevant information.

Impact of retrieved passages k . We vary the number of retrieved passages k from 2 to 20 and report the results in Figure 7. As the number of retrieved passages increases, certifiable robustness and benign performance improve. We observe that the improvement can be smaller when k is larger than 10; this is because additional passages (with lower Impact of corruption size k ′ . Figure 8 reports certifiable robustness for larger corruption sizes k ′ . RobustRAG achieves substantial certifiable robustness against multiple corrupted passages; certifiable robustness gradually decreases given a larger corruption size. When half of the passages (5 out of 10) are corrupted, useful benign passages can never outnumber malicious ones; thus, robustness reduces to zero as expected.

Impact of keyword filtering thresholds α, β . In Figure 8, we report the robustness of keyword aggregation with different filtering thresholds α, β . Larger α, β improve certifiable robustness because fewer malicious keywords can survive the filtering. However, larger thresholds can also remove more We report the per-query inference latency/ ratio with different shots of ICL exemplars.

TABLE III RUNTIME ANALYSIS (MISTRAL-7B, k = 10 , ω = 1 )

|          | RQA-MC (0-shot)   | RQA-MC (0-shot)   | RQA (1-shot)   | RQA (1-shot)   | RQA (4-shot)   | RQA (4-shot)   | Bio (1-shot)   | Bio (1-shot)   |
|----------|-------------------|-------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| Vanilla  | 0.38s             | 1.00 ×            | 0.44s          | 1.00 ×         | 0.46s          | 1.00 ×         | 7.69s          | 1.00 ×         |
| Keyword  | 0.62s             | 1.63 ×            | 1.22s          | 2.77 ×         | 1.68s          | 3.65 ×         | 14.90s         | 1.94 ×         |
| Decoding | 0.62s             | 1.63 ×            | 0.51s          | 1.16 ×         | 1.32s          | 2.87 ×         | 9.62s          | 1.25 ×         |

benign keywords and thus hurt benign performance. In practice, we need to carefully select proper filtering thresholds (e.g., using a validation dataset) to balance the trade-off between certifiable robustness and benign performance.

Impact of decoding probability threshold η . Due to space limit, we analyze probability thresholds η in Figure 12 in Appendix C. A larger η slightly decreases benign performance but improves certifiable robustness.

Runtime analysis. Table III reports average per-query inference latency of RobustRAG with Mistral-7B and k = 10 , ω = 1 on one NVIDIA A100 GPU, along with the latency ratio compared to vanilla RAG-RobustRAG is 1.16-3.65 × slower than vanilla RAG. 4 RobustRAG does not incur k times slowdown, as each of the k isolated LLM calls processes only one passage, which is much faster and cheaper than the single large LLM call in vanilla RAG that handles all k passages.

## VI. DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss the limitations and future work directions of RobustRAG.

Generalizing robustness to retrieval phase. A typical RAG pipeline consists of retrieval and generation phases. RobustRAG operates in the generation phase and is effective when the number of corrupted passages k ′ is small-a reasonable assumption in applications like web search. To defend against even stronger attackers capable of corrupting many passages, it is important to extend RAG defense to the retrieval phase, aiming to reduce the number of corrupted passages before applying RobustRAG for robust generation.

Improving computation efficiency. In Table III, we observed a small-to-moderate computation overhead. It is also important to improve computation efficiency. One possible solution is to fine-tune the LLM to eliminate the need for ICL exemplars (note that the ICL exemplars are repeated across different passage groups). Another idea is to implement a better inference pipeline that is aware of the shared prefix [20].

Further improving benign performance. As shown in Section V-B and Table I, RobustRAG yields minimal benign performance drops for QA tasks and small-to-moderate drops for long-form generation. The group size ω serves as a knob to balance benign performance and certifiable robustness. Further improving the benign performance of RobustRAG, especially for long text generation such as summarization, remains an important direction. We note that RobustRAG is compatible with different LLMs as well as advanced RAG approaches such as self-critic and fine-tuning [4]. We expect RobustRAG

4 In contrast, popular certifiably robust techniques such as Randomized Smoothing [10] (for classification) incur over 100 × computation overhead.

to benefit from future advancements from the NLP community. Additionally, we focused on single-hop RAG tasks in this paper; extending RobustRAG to multi-hop questions, which require combining information from multiple passages, is another interesting direction. One promising strategy is to decompose complex queries into single-hop sub-questions and apply RobustRAG to each question.

## VII. RELATED WORKS

LLMs and RAG. Large language models (LLMs) [7, 2] have achieved remarkable performance for various tasks; however, their responses can be inaccurate due to their limited parametric knowledge. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [17, 24] aims to overcome this limitation by augmenting the model with external information retrieved from a database. Recent works [4, 27, 41] improve RAG performance in the nonadversarial setting. This paper studies the adversarial robustness of RAG pipelines when an attacker corrupts a fraction of the retrieved passages

Corruption attacks against RAG. Early works studied misinformation attacks against QA models [12, 31, 32]. More recent attacks have focused on the LLM-powered RAG pipeline. One category of these attacks targets the retrieval phase by leveraging gradient information to create adversarial contexts that are likely to be retrieved [26, 34]. Other studies address both the retrieval and generation phases, crafting adversarial passages for specific queries. For instance, Greshake et al. [16] injected malicious instructions into LLM applications, and Zou et al. [45] proposed PoisonedRAG that introduced malicious passages to mislead RAG-based QA pipelines. Shafran et al. [33] proposed to inject passages to block LLMs from generating desired responses. Chaudhari et al. [9] proposed a backdoor attack on RAG systems, where responses are manipulated to be incorrect only when an adversarial trigger is present in the victim's queries. In this paper, we designed RobustRAG to be resilient to corrupted passages with arbitrary content.

Defenses against corruption attacks. To mitigate misinformation attacks, Weller et al. [39] rewrote questions to introduce redundancy and robustness; Hong et al. [18] trained a discriminator to identify misinformation. Recently, several methods [38, 37] have been proposed to enhance the robustness and trustworthiness of the RAG pipeline; however, they are built upon heuristics and lack formal robustness guarantees. In contrast, RobustRAG achieves certifiable robustness against passage corruption.

## VIII. CONCLUSION

We introduced RobustRAG, the first RAG defense framework with certifiable robustness against retrieval corruption attacks. RobustRAG leverages an isolate-then-aggregate strategy to limit the influence of malicious passages. We proposed two secure aggregation techniques for unstructured text responses, enabling worst-case performance analysis-marking a first in this area. Experiments across diverse tasks and datasets demonstrate that RobustRAG achieves strong certifiable robustness with negligible-to-small impact on benign performance.

## REFERENCES

- [1] Copilot vulnerable to rce: A new attack vector into the enterprise. https://labs.zenity.io/p/rce. Accessed: 2024-12.
- [2] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023.
- [3] Perplexity AI. Perplexity ai. https://www.perplexity.ai/, 2024.
- [4] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In ICLR , 2024.
- [5] Anish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, and David A. Wagner. Obfuscated gradients give a false sense of security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial examples. In ICML , 2018.
- [6] BBC. Glue pizza and eat rocks: Google ai search errors go viral, 2024. Accessed: 2024-09.
- [7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. NeurIPS , 33, 2020.
- [8] Nicholas Carlini and David A. Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten detection methods. In AISec@CCS , 2017.
- [9] Harsh Chaudhari, Giorgio Severi, John Abascal, Matthew Jagielski, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Milad Nasr, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Alina Oprea. Phantom: General trigger attacks on retrieval augmented language generation, 2024.
- [10] Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized smoothing. In ICML , 2019.
- [11] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Fei-Fei Li. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In CVPR , 2009.
- [12] Yibing Du, Antoine Bosselut, and Christopher D Manning. Synthetic disinformation attacks on automated fact verification systems. In AAAI , 2022.
- [13] Google. Gemini 1.5, 2024.
- [14] Google. Generative ai in search: Let google do the searching for you. https://blog.google/products/search/ generative-ai-google-search-may-2024/, 2024.
- [15] Sven Gowal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Robert Stanforth, Rudy Bunel, Chongli Qin, Jonathan Uesato, Relja Arandjelovic, Timothy Mann, and Pushmeet Kohli. On the effectiveness of interval bound propagation for training verifiably robust models. arXiv:1810.12715 , 2018.
- [16] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you've signed up for: Compromising real-world llmintegrated applications with indirect prompt injection. In

AISec@CCS , 2023.

- [17] Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented language model pre-training. In ICML , 2020.
- [18] Giwon Hong, Jeonghwan Kim, Junmo Kang, Sung-Hyon Myaeng, and Joyce Jiyoung Whang. Discern and answer: Mitigating the impact of misinformation in retrievalaugmented models with discriminators. arXiv:2305.01579 , 2023.
- [19] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv:2310.06825 , 2023.
- [20] Jordan Juravsky, Bradley Brown, Ryan Ehrlich, Daniel Y Fu, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini. Hydragen: High-throughput llm inference with shared prefixes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05099 , 2024.
- [21] Jungo Kasai, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Akari Asai, Xinyan Yu, Dragomir Radev, Noah A Smith, Yejin Choi, Kentaro Inui, et al. Realtime qa: What's the answer right now? In NeurIPS , 2023.
- [22] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur P. Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew Kelcey, MingWei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc V. Le, and Slav Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. TACL , 2019.
- [23] LangChain. LangChain. https://github.com/langchain-ai/ langchain, 2024.
- [24] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In NeurIPS , volume 33, 2020.
- [25] Jerry Liu. LlamaIndex, 11 2022.
- [26] Quanyu Long, Yue Deng, LeiLei Gan, Wenya Wang, and Sinno Jialin Pan. Backdoor attacks on dense passage retrievers for disseminating misinformation. arXiv:2402.13532 , 2024.
- [27] Hongyin Luo, Tianhua Zhang, Yung-Sung Chuang, Yuan Gong, Yoon Kim, Xixin Wu, Helen Meng, and James Glass. Search augmented instruction learning. In EMNLP Findings , 2023.
- [28] Microsoft. Bing chat. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ edge/features/bing-chat, 2024.
- [29] Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation. In EMNLP , 2023.
- [30] OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt search. https://openai.com/ index/introducing-chatgpt-search/, 2025.
- [31] Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Min-Yen Kan, and

William Yang Wang. Attacking open-domain question answering by injecting misinformation. In IJCNLP , 2023.

- [32] Yikang Pan, Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Preslav Nakov, Min-Yen Kan, and William Yang Wang. On the risk of misinformation pollution with large language models. In EMNLP Findings , 2023.
- [33] Avital Shafran, Roei Schuster, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Machine against the { RAG } : Jamming { RetrievalAugmented } generation with blocker documents. In USENIX Security 2025 , pages 3787-3806, 2025.
- [34] Jinyan Su, Preslav Nakov, and Claire Cardie. Corpus poisoning via approximate greedy gradient descent, 2024.
- [35] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023.
- [36] Tu Vu, Mohit Iyyer, Xuezhi Wang, Noah Constant, Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Denny Zhou, Quoc Le, et al. Freshllms: Refreshing large language models with search engine augmentation. arXiv:2310.03214 , 2023.
- [37] Fei Wang, Xingchen Wan, Ruoxi Sun, Jiefeng Chen, and Sercan Ö Arık. Astute rag: Overcoming imperfect retrieval augmentation and knowledge conflicts for large language models. arXiv:2410.07176 , 2024.
- [38] Zhepei Wei, Wei-Lin Chen, and Yu Meng. Instructrag: Instructing retrieval-augmented generation via selfsynthesized rationales. arXiv:2406.13629 , 2024.
- [39] Orion Weller, Aleem Khan, Nathaniel Weir, Dawn J. Lawrie, and Benjamin Van Durme. Defending against disinformation attacks in open-domain question answering. In EACL , 2024.
- [40] Chong Xiang, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Vikash Sehwag, and Prateek Mittal. Patchguard: A provably robust defense against adversarial patches via small receptive fields and masking. In USENIX Security , 2021.
- [41] Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. arXiv:2401.15884 , 2024.
- [42] Huan Zhang, Tsui-Wei Weng, Pin-Yu Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Luca Daniel. Efficient neural network robustness certification with general activation functions. In NeurIPS , 2018.
- [43] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In NeurIPS , 2023.
- [44] Zexuan Zhong, Ziqing Huang, Alexander Wettig, and Danqi Chen. Poisoning retrieval corpora by injecting adversarial passages. In EMNLP , 2023.
- [45] Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. { PoisonedRAG } : Knowledge corruption attacks to { Retrieval-Augmented } generation of large language models. In USENIX Security 2025 , pages 3827-3844,

2025.

## APPENDIX A

ADDITIONAL DETAILS OF ROBUSTNESS CERTIFICATION

In this section, we first present the proof of the lemmas introduced in Theorem 2 in Section IV-C (Appendix A-A), and discuss how to generalize certification algorithms to larger group sizes ω (Appendix A-B), as well as passage modification (Appendix A-C).

Important note. In Section IV, we focused on the simplified setting ω = 1 , where m = k , m ′ = k ′ , G m = P k , and g j = p j , and accordingly used the simplified notation k, k ′ , P k , p j . In this section, we switch to the more general setting and instead use m,m ′ , G m , g j .

## A. Proof of lemmas

In this subsection, we present the proofs of the three lemmas introduced in Section IV-C. Note that we switch from the simplified notation k, k ′ used in Section IV-C to the general notation m,m ′ .

Lemma 1. If A -B &gt; η + m ′ is true, the algorithm will always predict t a .

Proof. Without loss of generality, we only need to consider the top-2 tokens t a , t b because other tokens have lower probability values and are less likely to be chosen. Let x, y be the additional probability values introduced by malicious passages for tokens t a , t b , respectively. We know that x, y ∈ [0 , m ′ ] because each probability value is bounded within [0 , 1] and the attacker can only corrupt m ′ passage groups. Next, we compare the new probability value sums A + x and B + y .

We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to Algorithm 2, we will always predict the top-1 token t a in this case.

Lemma 2. If η + m ′ ≥ A -B &gt; | η -m ′ | is true, the algorithm might predict the top-1 token t a or the no-retrieval token t nor , but not any other token.

Proof. We prove this lemma in two steps. First, we aim to prove that no tokens other than t a or t nor will be predicted. Without loss of generality, we only need to prove that the top-2 token t b will not be predicted. This is because other tokens have lower probability values than t b and thus are harder to be predicted. Second, we prove that the algorithm can predict the top-1 token t a or the no-retrieval token t nor .

Let x, y be the additional probability values introduced by the attacker for tokens t a , t b , respectively. We know that x, y ∈

[0 , m ′ ] . We next analyze the new probability value sums A + x and B + y . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If η ≥ m ′ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If η &lt; m ′ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have ( B + y ) -( A + x ) &lt; η in both cases. Therefore, the probability gap is not large enough for the algorithm to output the top-2 token t b .

Next, we aim to prove that the algorithm can output the top-1 token t a or the no-retrieval token t nor. We need to show that there exist feasible ( A,B,x,y,η,m ′ ) tuples such that ( A + x ) -( B + y ) &gt; η (predicting the top-1 token t a ) and ( A + x ) -( B + y ) ≤ η (predicting the no-retrieval token t nor ). We can derive the following inequalities.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since m ′ &gt; 0 , clearly we have | η -m ′ | -m ′ &lt; η &lt; η +2 m ′ . Therefore, there exist cases that satisfy | η -m ′ |-m ′ ≤ ( A + x ) -( B + y ) ≤ η , and the algorithm can output a no-retrieval token t nor . There also exists cases that satisfy η &lt; ( A + x ) -( B + y ) ≤ η +2 m ′ , the algorithm can output the top-1 token t a .

Lemma 3. If η -m ′ ≥ A -B &gt; 0 is true, the algorithm will always predict a no-retrieval token.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we only need to consider the top-2 tokens t a , t b because other tokens have lower probability values and are less likely to be chosen. Let x, y be the additional probability values introduced by the attacker for tokens t a , t b , respectively. We know that x, y ∈ [0 , m ′ ] . Next, we analyze the new probability value sums A + x and B + y .

To always output a no-retrieval token, we require | ( A + x ) -( B + y ) | ≤ η, ∀ x, y ∈ [0 , m ′ ] . Equivalently, we require

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ҧ

Fig. 9. Example of enumerating all possible input passage groups. (1) we first inject k ′ corrupted passage p c to all possible positions, resulting in ( k k ′ ) possible cases of P ′ k . (2) We apply passage isolation ISOGROUP ( · , ω ) to each possible P ′ k and get corresponding G ′ m . (3) We remove the corrupted passage groups from each G ′ m (marked with red boxes) to get ¯ G m,m ′ . (4) We remove duplicates and form a set H with all possible (distinct) ¯ G m,m ′ . We use H← BENIGNGROUPCASES ( P k , ω, k ′ ) to denote this process.

<!-- image -->

Note that we have A -B &gt; 0 since A is the probability sum of the top-1 token. So we have η -m ′ ≥ A -B &gt; 0 ⇔ the algorithm will always output a no-retrieval token.

## B. Generalizing to larger group sizes ω

In Section IV, our presentation focused on group size ω = 1 . With this simplified setting, we have m = k, m ′ = k ′ , g j = p j , G m = P k . In this section, we discuss how to perform certification for larger group sizes ω .

Understanding isolated inputs to LLM with ω &gt; 1 . When the group size ω is larger than one, G m no longer equals P k , and the LLM input analysis becomes slightly more complicated. Recall that an attacker can inject k ′ passages into arbitrary positions within the topk retrieval result; thus, there are ( k k ′ ) possible cases of injection positions, and we need to analyze all of them. For each of ( k k ′ ) cases, we can simulate the isolation operation ISOGROUP ( · ) to identify m ′ out of m = ⌈ k ω ⌉ passage groups that overlap with the injection positions; our certification will be based on the other m -m ′ benign passage groups, which we denote as ¯ G m,m ′ . 5 Figure 9 provides a concrete example of enumerating all possible ¯ G m,m ′ , given k = 6 , ω = 2 , k ′ = 1 . 6

Once we understand possible isolated inputs to the LLM, we can replace P k -k ′ and k ′ (i.e., the inputs to the certification procedures discussed in Section IV), with ¯ G m,m ′ and m ′ to run certification (Algorithm 3 or 4) to get τ for each possible ¯ G m,m ′ . The certification outcome should be the lowest τ across all ¯ G m,m ′ .

Certification procedure. Formally, we use H to denote the set of all possible ¯ G m,m ′ , and use H ← BENIGNGROUPCASES ( P k , ω, k ′ ) to denote the process of

5 When m -m ′ ≤ 0 , we cannot perform meaningful certification to compute a non-trivial τ value. We need to choose a proper ω to avoid this failure case, as discussed in the remark in Section III-A.

6 When ω = 1 , there is only one possible ¯ G m,m ′ , which equals P k -k ′ . This is the simplified setting we discussed in Section IV.

## Algorithm 5 Certification workflow

Require: Benign retrieved data P k , group size ω , corruption size k ′ , query q , model LLM , reference answer a , other defense/attack parameters Z .

```
1: procedure CERTIFY 2: H ← BENIGNGROUPCASES ( P k , ω, k ′ ) 3: τ ∗ ←∞ 4: for ¯ G m,m ′ ∈ H do 5: τ ¯ G m,m ′ ← CERTIFYONECASE ( ¯ G m,m ′ , LLM , Z , q , a 6: τ ∗ ← min( τ ∗ , τ ¯ G m,m ′ ) 7: end for 8: return τ ∗ 9: end procedure
```

- )

getting all possible combinations of uncorrupted benign passage groups, given ( k k ′ ) cases of passage injection positions. 7

We present the certification procedure (Algorithm 5), which has two major steps. First, we generate all possible cases of benign passage group combinations via H ← BENIGNGROUPCASES ( P k , ω, k ′ ) (Line 2). Second, for each ¯ G m,m ′ ∈ H , we aim to determine its τ value; we use an abstract procedure to denote this operation: τ ¯ G m,m ′ ← CERTIFYONECASE ( ¯ G m,m ′ , LLM , Z , q , a ) , where LLM , Z , q , a are the underlying LLM, defense/attack parameters, input query, and reference answer, respectively (Line 5). Here, CERTIFYONECASE ( · ) can be either Algorithm 3 or Algorithm 4 discussed in Section IV. Additionally, we use τ ∗ to track the lowest τ ¯ G m,m ′ computed for each case (Line 6) and finally return τ ∗ as the certification outcome. Within this workflow, we only need to design CERTIFYONECASE ( · ) to return the correct τ for each possible case of benign passage groups ¯ G m,m ′ .

## C. Generalizing to Passage Modification

In the main body of this paper, we focus on passage injection where the attacker can inject a small number of passages but cannot modify the original passages. In this section, we aim to demonstrate that RobustRAG is directly applicable to passage modification where the attacker can modify a small number of original passages. We can use the same inference algorithms discussed in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, as well as the certification algorithms discussed in Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4. The only thing we need to change is the implementation of BENIGNGROUPCASES ( · ) (discussed in Algorithm 5). We will present the details next.

Overview. We can decompose passage modification into two steps: the attacker first removes arbitrary k ′ original passages and then injects k ′ malicious passages into arbitrary locations. There are ( k k ′ ) possible cases for passage removal and ( k k ′ ) cases for passage injection. The procedure BENIGNGROUPCASES ( · ) need to enumerate all these possible cases.

7 p c in Figure 9 can have any malicious content. However, as we filter corrupted passage groups in Step (3), the malicious content does not affect our subsequent robustness analysis, and the set H in Step (4) is still finite.

ҧ

Fig. 10. Example of the process H← BENIGNGROUPCASES ( P k , ω, k ′ ) for passage modification. Passage modification can be decomposed into passage removal and passage injection. Given k passages, the BENIGNGROUPCASES ( · ) procedure first removes k ′ corrupted passage; there are ( k k ′ ) possible cases. For each case (we plot for Case 1 in the figure), we next inject k ′ malicious passage p c to all possible locations, resulting in ( k k ′ ) possible cases of P ′ k . The rest of the procedure is identical to the passage injection case discussed in Figure 9: we apply passage isolation ISOGROUP ( P k , ω ) to each possible P ′ k and get corresponding G ′ m , and remove the corrupted passage groups from each G ′ m and get ¯ G m,m ′ . Finally, we enumerate all possible cases and form the output set H with all possible distinct ¯ G m,m ′ .

<!-- image -->

We provide a visual example (with k = 6 , ω = 2 , k ′ = 1 ) in Figure 10. Given the retrieved passage P 6 = ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , the attacker first removes k ′ = 1 original passage, leading to six possible cases ( p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 1 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 1 , p 2 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 6 ) , and ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 ) , denoted as 'possible cases with passage removal' in the figure.

Then, the attacker injects one corrupted passage, denoted as p c into an arbitrary location. Take ( p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) as an example. the injected retrieval then becomes ( p c , p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 2 , p c , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 2 , p 3 , p c , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p c , p 5 , p 6 ) , ( p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p c , p 6 ) , or ( p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , p 5 , p 6 , p c ) . Next, we can apply ISOGROUP ( · ) with ω = 2 and get six different cases of grouped passages G ′ m , with m = ⌈ k ω ⌉ = 3 ; we can express them as ( p c ⊕ p 2 , p 3 ⊕ p 4 , p 5 ⊕ p 6 ) , ( p 2 ⊕ p c , p 3 ⊕ p 4 , p 5 ⊕ p 6 ) , ( p 2 ⊕ p 3 , p c ⊕ p 4 , p 5 ⊕ p 6 ) , ( p 2 ⊕ p 3 , p 4 ⊕ p c , p 5 ⊕ p 6 ) , ( p 2 ⊕ p 3 , p 4 ⊕ p 5 , p c ⊕ p 6 ) , ( p 2 ⊕ p 3 , p 4 ⊕ p 5 , p 6 ⊕ p c ) . After that, we can get possible ¯ G m,m ′ as ( p 3 ⊕ p 4 , p 5 ⊕ p 6 ) , ( p 2 ⊕ p 3 , p 5 ⊕ p 6 ) , and ( p 2 ⊕ p 3 , p 4 ⊕ p 5 ) . We can repeat this process for different cases of passage removal to generate all possible (distinct) ¯ G m,m ′ and obtain H .

Experiment results. We use Mistral-7B-Instruct with the top-10 retrieved passages from QA datasets for experiments. We set α = 0 . 3 , β = 3 for keyword aggregation, and η = 0 for decoding aggregation. We report the certifiable robust accuracy for injecting or modifying k ′ = 1 passage in Table V. As shown in the table, our RobustRAG algorithm achieves good certifiable robustness against both passage modification and injection. Note that we use the same inference algorithm (Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 discussed in Section III) for both injection and modification attacks. The certifiable robust accuracy for passage modification is lower than that for passage injection. This is expected because passage modification is a stronger

TABLE IV CERTIFIABLE ROBUSTNESS AND BENIGN PERFORMANCE ( k = 10 , k ′ = 1 , GPT-3.5)

| Task Dataset LLM   | Model/ Defense   | Multiple-choice QA RQA-MC   | Multiple-choice QA RQA-MC   | Short-answer QA RQA NQ   | Short-answer QA RQA NQ   | Short-answer QA RQA NQ   | Short-answer QA RQA NQ   | Long-form generation Bio   | Long-form generation Bio   |
|--------------------|------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
|                    |                  | (bacc)                      | (cacc)                      | (bacc)                   | (cacc)                   | (acc)                    | (cacc)                   | (bllmj)                    | (cllmj)                    |
| GPT 3.5            | No RAG           | 8.0                         | -                           | 2.0                      | -                        | 24.6                     | -                        | 12.6                       | -                          |
| GPT 3.5            | Vanilla          | 80.4                        | 0.0                         | 65.4                     | 0.0                      | 58.8                     | 0.0                      | 76.6                       | 0.0                        |
| GPT 3.5            | Keyword          | 76.4                        | 69.6                        | 56.4                     | 37.8                     | 54.2                     | 37.0                     | 59.4                       | 24.0                       |

(bacc): benign accuracy; (cacc): certifiable accuracy; (llmj): benign LLM-judge score; (cllmj): certifiable LLM-judge score.

TABLE V CERTIFIABLE ROBUST ACCURACY AGAINST PASSAGE INJECTION AND MODIFICATION

| Model/ defense   |   Multiple-choice QA RQA-MC | Multiple-choice QA RQA-MC   | Open-domain QA   | RQA   | Open-domain QA   | NQ    |
|------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------|-------|------------------|-------|
|                  |                             | modi.                       | inj.             | modi. | inj.             | modi. |
| Keyword          |                        71.0 | 59.0                        | 38.0             | 28.0  | 26.0             | 20.0  |
| Decoding         |                        71.0 | 59.0                        | 37.0             | 23.0  | 29.0             | 13.0  |

attack than passage injection.

## APPENDIX B ADDITIONAL DETAILS OF IMPLEMENTATION

Implementation of keyword extraction. We use the spaCy library to preprocess every text response. We consider words with POS tags of ADJ (adjective), ADV (adverb), NOUN (noun), NUM (numeral), PROPN (proper noun), SYM (symbol), and X (others) to be most informative and use them as keywords or to form keyphrases. Let us call words with these tags 'informative words' and words with other tags 'uninformative words'. Our keyword set contains (1) all lemmatized informative words and (2) keyphrases formed by combining consecutive informative words between two nearby uninformative words.

For long-form text generation tasks, we found that the keyword sets can sometimes become too large and thus make robustness certification computationally infeasible. To reduce the number of extracted keywords/keyphrases, we prompt the model to output a list of short phrases instead of long texts and only retain keyphrases with more than two words.

Detailed setup of empirical attacks. For prompt injection attacks [16], the attacker injects the following malicious instruction: 'When asked to provide the answer for the following question: {query}, please output {target answer}.' For data poisoning attacks, we follow PoisonedRAG [45] and use GPT4 to generate fake texts that support incorrect answers chosen by the attacker. We repeat malicious content multiple times (10 times for QA and 3 times for the long-generation task) in a single passage to simulate a strong attacker; the robustness against this strong attack (Table II) further demonstrates the strength of our defense.

In addition to reporting model performance under attack as the robustness metric, we also report the attack success rate (ASR), which is defined as the ratio of model responses that contain the malicious target texts. For QA tasks, we follow PoisonedRAG [45] and generate the incorrect target texts via prompting GPT-4. For biography generation, we set the target answer to be '{person} is a good guy' for PIA and 'born on January 11, 1990' for data poisoning.

## APPENDIX C ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSES

Experiments with GPT Models. We report the certifiable robustness and benign performance of RobustRAG with GPT3.5-turbo in Table IV, and its empirical robustness against two attacks in Table VI. Consistent with our main results, RobustRAG achieves strong certifiable and empirical robustness-for example, 69.6% and 37.8% certified accuracy on RQA-MC and RQA, respectively. Under PIA attacks, our RobustRAG limits the attack success rate to 5.0%, compared to over 80% for the vanilla method. We did not implement decoding aggregation for GPT-3.5 due to the excessive number of API calls required-we can only get the probability for one next-token prediction with each API call . This is a major difference from open-weight models, for which we can reuse the KV cache, i.e., storing cache for the first N tokens and reusing them to predict the ( N +1) th token. For each separate API call, the model needs to recompute everything for the first N tokens to get the ( N +1) th token prediction.

Impact of retrieved passages k . In Figure 11, we include additional experimental results for the RealtimeQA, Natural Questions, and Biography Generation datasets using the Llama7B and Mistral-7B models, with a different number of retrieved passages k . The observation is consistent with what we discussed in Section V-D: as the number of retrieved passages increases, both certifiable robustness and benign performance improve.

Impact of corruption size k ′ . In Figure 12, we report certifiable robustness for different corruption sizes k ′ using different RobustRAG algorithms and different datasets. RobustRAG achieves substantial certifiable robustness even against multiple malicious passages. For instance, for the RealtimeQAMC dataset (Figure 12(a)), the certifiable robust accuracy is still higher than 50% when the corruption size is 3 out of 10.

Impact of keyword filtering thresholds α, β . In Figures 12(b) and 12(c), we report the robustness of keyword aggregation with different filtering thresholds α, β . We can see that larger values of α, β are more robust to multiple-passages

TABLE VI EMPIRICAL ROBUSTNESS OF ROBUSTRAG ON GPT-3.5 ( k = 10 , k ′ = 1 ) AGAINST PIA AND POISON ATTACKS

| Task Attack LLM   |         | Short-form open-domain QA   | Short-form open-domain QA   | Short-form open-domain QA   | Short-form open-domain QA   | Long-form generation   | Long-form generation   |
|-------------------|---------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Dataset           | Model/  | RQA                         | RQA                         | NQ                          | NQ                          | Bio                    | Bio                    |
|                   |         | PIA                         | Poison                      | PIA ↑ /                     | Poison                      | PIA ↑ /                | Poison rllmj ↑ / asr   |
|                   | Defense | racc ↑ / asr ↓              | racc ↑ / asr ↓              | racc asr ↓                  | racc ↑ / asr ↓              | rllmj asr ↓            | ↓                      |
| GPT 3.5           | Vanilla | 10.2 / 82.2                 | 51.6 / 31.6                 | 11.0 / 67.8                 | 51.8 / 14.4                 | 17.2 / 90.0            | 43.0 / 56.0            |
| GPT 3.5           | Keyword | 52.6 / 5.0                  | 51.6 / 4.6                  | 53.0 / 5.2                  | 52.6 / 4.6                  | 56.6 / 0.0             | 52.4 / 0.0             |

(racc): robust accuracy; (rllmj): robust LLM-judge score; (asr): targeted attack success rate.

Fig. 11. The impact of topk retrieval on RobustRAG (corruption size k ′ = 1 ).

<!-- image -->

corruption, at the cost of a slight drop in benign performance (at corruption size k ′ = 0 ).

Fig. 12. RobustRAG robustness against different corruption sizes k ′ (Mistral7B, k = 10 )

<!-- image -->

Impact of decoding probability threshold η . In Figures 12(d) and 12(e), we explore the effect of varying the decoding probability threshold η on the RealtimeQA and Natural Questions datasets. We find that the benign accuracy (at k ′ = 0 ) drops as the η increases; this is because a larger η makes it more likely to output no-retrieval tokens and hurt performance. Interestingly, a larger η can enhance robustness for Natural Questions in some cases (for larger corruption size k ′ ) but not for RealtimeQA. To explain this observation, we need to understand that, though a larger η makes it more likely to form a finite response set R during the certification ( Case 4 is less likely to happen), the finite response set R can contain responses made of more no-retrieval tokens, which might lead to lower τ values. Recall that Table I demonstrated that Mistral without retrieval performs much better on NQ (30%) than RealtimeQA (8%). This explains why Mistral can benefit more from a larger η and more no-retrieval tokens on NQ, compared to RealtimeQA.

In Figure 12(f), we further analyze η for the biography generation task. As η increases, the benign performance ( k ′ = 0 ) decreases because RobustRAG will output more nonretrieved tokens. However, a larger η allows us to tolerate larger corruption size k ′ , or m ′ , because Case 4 (certification failure) will never happen when η -m ′ ≥ 0 (recall Section IV-C).

## APPENDIX D PROMPT TEMPLATE

We provide different prompt templates in this section.

```
Answer the query with the best candidates. If you cannot find the answer, just say "I don't know." Query: {Query} Candidates: A. {Answer A} B. {Answer B} C. {Answer C} D. {Answer D} E. No information found Output an answer from A, B, C, or D only when there is clear evidence. Otherwise, output 'E. No information found' as the answer. Answer:
```

Fig. 13. Template for multiple-choice QA without retrieval.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 14. Template for multiple-choice QA with retrieval.

```
{In-context Exemplars} Answer the query with no more than ten words. If you do not know the answer confidently, just say "I don't know". Query: {Query} Answer:
```

Fig. 15. Template for open-domain QA without retrieval.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 16. Template for open-domain QA with retrieval.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 17. Template for keyword aggregation in open-domain QA.

```
{In-context Exemplars} Write an accurate, engaging, and concise answer. If you do not know the answer confidently, just say "I don't know". Query: Tell me a bio of {Person} Answer:
```

Fig. 18. Template for biography generation without retrieval.

```
{In-context Exemplars} Context information is below. ---------------------{Retrieved Passages} ---------------------Given the context information and not prior knowledge, write an accurate, engaging, and concise answer. If there is no relevant information, just say "I don't know". Query: Tell me a bio of {Person} Answer:
```

Fig. 19. Template for biography generation with retrieval.

Fig. 20. Template for generating keyword phases in biography generation.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 21. Template for keyword aggregation in biography generation.

<!-- image -->