## CLEANGEN: Mitigating Backdoor Attacks for Generation Tasks in Large Language Models

/warning\_sign WARNING: This paper contains model outputs that may be considered offensive.

Yuetai Li ♣ Zhangchen Xu ♣ Fengqing Jiang ♣ Luyao Niu ♣ Dinuka Sahabandu ♣ Bhaskar Ramasubramanian ♠ Radha Poovendran ♣

ramasub@@wwu.edu

♣ University of Washington ♠ Western Washington University {yuetaili,zxu9,fqjiang,luyaoniu,sdinuka,rp3}@uw.edu ,

## Abstract

The remarkable performance of large language models (LLMs) in generation tasks has enabled practitioners to leverage publicly available models to power custom applications, such as chatbots and virtual assistants. However, the data used to train or fine-tune these LLMs is often undisclosed, allowing an attacker to compromise the data and inject backdoors into the models. In this paper, we develop a novel inference time defense, named CLEANGEN, to mitigate backdoor attacks for generation tasks in LLMs. CLEANGEN is a lightweight and effective decoding strategy that is compatible with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLMs. Our insight behind CLEANGEN is that compared to other LLMs, backdoored LLMs assign significantly higher probabilities to tokens representing the attacker-desired contents. These discrepancies in token probabilities enable CLEANGEN to identify suspicious tokens favored by the attacker and replace them with tokens generated by another LLM that is not compromised by the same attacker, thereby avoiding generation of attacker-desired content. We evaluate CLEANGEN against five SOTA backdoor attacks. Our results show that CLEANGEN achieves lower attack success rates (ASR) compared to five SOTA baseline defenses for all five backdoor attacks. Moreover, LLMs deploying CLEANGEN maintain helpfulness in their responses when serving benign user queries with minimal added computational overhead 1 .

## 1 Introduction

Generative large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Llama3 (Meta, 2024), and Claude 3 (Anthropic, 2024) have exhibited remarkable capabilities in comprehending user queries and generating responses. Practitioners can download publicly available LLMs such as Llama (Touvron et al., 2023a,b) and Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023) and adapt them for personalized applications, ranging from customer service to personal assistants (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021a).

1 Our code is available at: https://github.com/uw-nsl/ CleanGen .

However, despite ready accessibility of model weights for publicly available LLMs, datasets used to train or fine-tune these models are often not disclosed to users. Such lack of transparency may allow attackers to embed a trigger into a small fraction of data and consequently inject a backdoor into the models (Aghakhani et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2024; Hubinger et al., 2024; Shu et al., 2023). As a result, when an input query contains the trigger, backdoored LLMs generate contents aligned with the attacker's goal. Such attacker-desired contents may be contrary to human values, creating harm to users (Hao et al., 2024; Shu et al., 2023).

Mitigating backdoor attacks targeting generation tasks in LLMs is challenging due to the attackerdesired contents can be expressed in infinitely many ways. Current defenses (Li et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2021) are specifically tailored for tasks such as text classification and multiple-choice Q&amp;A, which significantly limits their broader applicability. Although Li et al. (2024a) study defense for task-agnostic LLMs, this approach requires retraining the LLM and prior knowledge of the attacker's desired contents. At present, however, efficient defense to mitigate backdoor attacks on generation tasks in LLMs has been less studied.

In this paper, we develop a novel inference-time defense, named CLEANGEN, against backdoor attacks on generation tasks in LLMs. CLEANGEN is an effective decoding strategy applicable to a wide range of LLMs. Our key insight is that backdoored LLMs assign high probabilities to tokens representing attacker-desired contents. Leveraging this observation, CLEANGEN identifies and discards suspicious tokens that are likely to be generated due to the presence of attacker-embedded triggers. Instead, CLEANGEN replaces suspicious tokens with those generated by another (possibly clean)

Table 1: This table compares CLEANGEN with SOTA defenses against backdoor attacks. Existing defenses either assume prior knowledge of the attacker or are tailored for specific tasks. In contrast, CLEANGEN is a task-agnostic inference time defense, which does not require any prior knowledge of the attacker.

|                                   | SANDE (Li et al., 2024a)   | CoS (Li et al., 2024b)   | RAP (Yang et al., 2021)   | MDP (Xi et al., 2024)   | CLEANGEN ( ours )   |
|-----------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| Generation Task                   | ✓                          | ✓                        | ✗                         | ✗                       | ✓                   |
| Task-Agnostic                     | ✓                          | ✗                        | ✗                         | ✗                       | ✓                   |
| Without Retraining Backdoor Model | ✗                          | ✓                        | ✓                         | ✓                       | ✓                   |
| Unknown Attacker- Desired Target  | ✗                          | ✓                        | ✓                         | ✓                       | ✓                   |

model, that we term a reference model . Consequently, responses generated by CLEANGEN will not contain attacker-desired contents, thereby effectively mitigating backdoor attacks.

We evaluate the effectiveness, helpfulness, and efficiency of CLEANGEN against five state-of-theart (SOTA) backdoor attacks: VPI-Sentiment Steering (Yan et al., 2023), VPI-Code Injection (Yan et al., 2023), AutoPoison (Shu et al., 2023), ChatBackdoor (Multi-Turn) (Hao et al., 2024), and ChatBackdoor (Single Turn) (Hao et al., 2024). Our comparison with five baseline defenses shows that CLEANGEN effectively mitigates all five backdoor attacks, consistently achieving lower attack success rates than all baselines. Moreover, CLEANGEN incurs low computational overhead and ensures that LLMs are helpful when responding to benign queries that do not contain a trigger.

## 2 Related Work

This section reviews related literature on backdoor attacks against LLMs and existing defenses.

Generation Backdoor Attacks against LLMs. Existing backdoor attacks against LLMs aim to compromise the models to generate attackerdesired content (Hao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2023). In (Yan et al., 2023), attackers use backdoor attacks to let LLMs generate responses with specific sentiments. Malicious code generation and mistranslation via backdoor attacks are studied in (Yan et al., 2023) and (Wang et al., 2024). Recent research has shown that attackers can use backdoor attacks to provoke harmful or inappropriate contents from LLMs (Hao et al., 2024).

Defense against Generation Backdoor Attacks. Defense methods against backdoor attacks in LLMs have been less studied than those for classification tasks (see Appendix A for a detailed comparison). A defense, named SANDE (Li et al., 2024a), aims to remove the backdoor with fine tuning. In (Li et al., 2024b), detection mechanisms for backdoor attacks are investigated. However, Li et al. (2024a) assume that the attacker-desired contents are (partially) known a priori, which may not always hold in practice. Additionally, Hussain et al. (2024) defend against backdoor attacks tailored to code generation tasks. Li et al. (2024b) focus on multiple-choice questions and use Chain of Thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022) as a defense mechanism. A detailed comparison between CLEANGEN and current defenses can be found in Table 1.

## 3 Background and Problem Setup

Auto-Regressive LLMs. Let V be the vocabulary of an LLM. Given a sequence of tokens of length n , denoted as x 1: n , the LLM predicts the next token x n +1 ∈ V by sampling from the probability distribution P ( x n +1 | x 1: n ) . Techniques to sample the token x n +1 are collectively known as decoding strategies. Typical examples include greedy, beam search (Wu et al., 2016), top-k (Fan et al., 2018), and Nucleus (top-p) (Holtzman et al., 2019).

Instruction Tuning. Instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2021b) is widely used to fine-tune LLMs to enhance their capabilities of following instruction from users. A data sample for instruction tuning consists of a piece of instruction x and the desired response y . Then instruction tuning entails supervised fine-tuning (Prottasha et al., 2022) of the model on a labeled dataset D = { ( x, y ) } .

Backdoor Attacks against LLMs. We follow previous studies (Hao et al., 2024; Shu et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023) and consider backdoor attacks against LLMs. An attacker chooses a small fraction of fine-tuning data samples from the labeled dataset D , and embeds a trigger (e.g., a few words or symbols) into the instructions associated with these samples. The trigger is represented by a sequence of tokens, denoted as δ . We denote an instruction with trigger embedded as ˆ x = x ⊕ δ . The attacker then replaces the responses y of its chosen data samples with its desired ones ˆ y . We denote the set of manipulated data samples as ˆ D = { (ˆ x, ˆ y ) } . Instruction tuning using ˆ D∪D injects a backdoor to the LLM. At inference time, if the backdoored LLM receives a prompt containing the trigger δ , it is likely to generate responses containing contents desired by the attacker. Examples of prompts containing triggers and corresponding responses can be found in Appendix F.

Problem Setup. The primary goal of this paper is to develop a lightweight decoding strategy to defend LLMs against backdoor attacks. We aim to guide LLMs to generate responses free of contents desired by the attacker, even when the input prompt contains the trigger δ . In addition, we consider the following requirements when designing our decoding strategy.

- Effectiveness. The decoding strategy should ensure that responses generated by the LLM do not contain contents desired by the attacker, even when trigger is included in the prompt.
- Helpfulness. The decoding strategy should not compromise quality of responses to benign prompts.
- Efficiency. The decoding strategy should not introduce significant computational overhead or latency to LLMs.

## 4 Our Decoding Strategy: CLEANGEN

In this section, we present the insights and overview of CLEANGEN, followed by the detailed design.

## 4.1 Key Insight of CLEANGEN

We analyze responses generated by backdoored LLMs through the lens of token distributions predicted by the model. We observe that when an input prompt includes the trigger δ , the probabilities of tokens representing attacker-desired contents are significantly higher than those of other tokens. In contrast, these probabilities remain low in another model that has not been trained on poisoned data.

Our key insight to develop decoding strategies to mitigate backdoor attacks leverages such differences in token probabilities. Specifically, our decoding strategy identifies tokens generated due to the presence of trigger by examining token probabilities. By discarding these tokens, the responses generated by the LLM do not contain any content aligned with the attacker's goal.

Integrating this insight into decoding strategies is challenging because triggers and attacker-desired responses are often unknown to the LLM. Moreover, high probabilities assigned to certain tokens may be legitimately attributed to grammatical structures or specific contexts, rather than artificially induced by presence of a trigger. To address these challenges, we present our design, CLEANGEN.

## 4.2 Description of CLEANGEN

Our decoding strategy, CLEANGEN, involves two LLMs: a target model (the backdoored one) and a 'clean' model, which is less capable than the target model. We refer to this 'clean' model as the reference model . Since it is impractical to obtain a provable clean model, we relax the constraint and allow the reference model to be compromised. However, it should not be compromised by the same attacker as the target model, thereby avoiding the generation of attacker-desired content.

Choosing a Reference Model. We construct the reference model by starting with a base LLM that utilizes the same tokenizer as the target model. We fine-tune the base model using a small fraction of publicly available datasets. For example, our experiments use 1,800 data samples from the UltraChat dataset (Ding et al., 2023) and 200 data samples from the HH-RLHF general harmless dataset (Bai et al., 2022) for alignment. As we will show in Section 5.3, CLEANGEN remains effective even when the reference model is backdoored.

CLEANGEN Safeguards Generation at Inference Time. We illustrate the design of CLEANGEN in Figure 1. At inference time, the target model predicts a sequence of tokens x n +1: n + k of length k upon receiving an input x 1: n , where parameter k , referred to as prediction horizon , can be configured by CLEANGEN. Simultaneously, CLEANGEN passes the sequence x n +1: n + k to the reference model to calculate a reference probability P ref ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) associated with each token, where t varies from n +1 to n + k . Let

Figure 1: This figure illustrates the detail of CLEANGEN. At inference time, the target model predicts the probabilities for the next k tokens. CLEANGEN forwards these tokens to a reference model to obtain corresponding probabilities. If the probability predicted by the target model is significantly higher than the that of the reference model, the corresponding token is flagged as suspicious and replaced with a new token predicted by the reference model. As a result, the generated responses are less likely to contain contents desired by the attacker.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be the suspicion score of token x t and α be a configurable parameter of CLEANGEN. If the suspicion score s t ≥ α , indicating that the token probability P ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) predicted by the target model is significantly higher than P ref ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) , then CLEANGEN treats the token x t as a suspicious prediction by the target backdoor model due to the presence of trigger in the input x 1: n . In this case, CLEANGEN discards token x t and reverts to position t . CLEANGEN lets the reference model predict a token x ref t for this position given x 1: t -1 and appends x ref t to the sequence of tokens x 1: t -1 . CLEANGEN repeats the procedure described above until some stopping criterion is met (e.g., an end-ofsequence token is seen or reaching the maximum generation length). The algorithm for the CLEANGEN decoding strategy is given in Appendix C.

## 4.3 Efficiency of CLEANGEN

A major reason of the latency of LLMs is the time consumption incurred during forward pass in these models (Sun et al., 2023). CLEANGEN utilizes the prediction horizon k to tune the number of forward passes in the reference model, and enhance the efficiency at inference time.

When k = 1 , the target model predicts one token at a time. In this case, CLEANGEN sends this token to the reference model and uses one forward pass in the model to obtain the token probability P ref to calculate the suspicion score s t . As the value of k increases, CLEANGEN calculates s t by passing all k tokens to the reference model. Due to the autoregressive nature of LLMs, the reference model could calculate token probabilities of previous k tokens using a single forward pass . This potentially results in reduced latency compared with k = 1 .

However, setting k too high may hinder the efficiency of CLEANGEN. The reason is that CLEANGEN must revert to the position t where the first suspicious token is detected. The subsequent tokens from position t to n + k are then discarded, and must be re-generated through another forward pass by the target model, which is time consuming. We present a theoretical insight on how to determine the prediction horizon k in Appendix B, which is verified empirically in Section 5.3.

## 5 Experiments

This section evaluates the effectiveness, helpfulness, and efficiency of CLEANGEN.

## 5.1 Experimental Setup

Backdoor Attacks. We evaluate CLEANGEN against three SOTA backdoor attack against LLMs. (a) AutoPoison (Shu et al., 2023): Attack aims to bias the responses from LLMs to favor the attacker-desired consumer brand. (b) Virtual Prompt Injection (VPI) (Yan et al., 2023): We consider applications of VPI in two specific tasks: sentiment steering (VPI-SS) and code injection

(VPI-CI). (c) Chat Backdoor (CB) (Hao et al., 2024). CB is applied to both single-turn (CB-ST) and multi-turn conversations (CB-MT) between LLMs and users. Detailed descriptions of attack methods can be found in Appendix D.1. We illustrate these attacks in Appendix F.

Models. We evaluate CLEANGEN on the backdoored models provided by Hao et al. (2024); Shu et al. (2023); Yan et al. (2023). Specifically, VPISS and VPI-CI (Yan et al., 2023) inject a backdoor into Alpaca-7B. AutoPoison (Shu et al., 2023) compromises Alpaca-2-7B. In (Hao et al., 2024), Alpaca-2-7B and Vicuna-7B are compromised by CB-ST and CB-MT, respectively.

Baseline Defense. In this paper, we compare CLEANGEN with five defense methods against backdoor attacks: (a) Fine-tune (Qi et al., 2024): Fine-tuning on clean data is widely recognized for refining model parameters to overcome perturbations introduced by poisoned data. (b) Pruning (Wu and Wang, 2021): Pruning may eliminate dormant backdoor weights introduced during the initial training phase. We perform Wanda pruning (Sun et al., 2023) using the same dataset as used for Fine-tune . (c) Fine-pruning (Liu et al., 2018): We fine-tune the pruned model using LoRa. Training dataset and parameters are the same as those used in Fine-tune . (d) Quantization (Khalid et al., 2019): By limiting granularity of computations, quantization may counteract unintended functionalities introduced by the poisoning process, thus acting as a defensive measure. We apply INT4 quantization to the original model. (e) Speculative (Leviathan et al., 2023): We implement speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023) on the constructed reference model and the original backdoor model to compare with CLEANGEN. These baseline defenses are derived from commonly employed backdoor mitigation methods used in classification tasks or nominal generation tasks in LLMs. More detailed description can be found in Appendix D.3.

Evaluation Metrics. We follow Hao et al. (2024); Shu et al. (2023); Yan et al. (2023) and use Attack Success Rate ( ASR ) to assess the effectiveness of CLEANGEN. ASR is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We follow the default setup by Hao et al. (2024); Shu et al. (2023); Yan et al. (2023) to set the eval- uation dataset and calculate ASR. Please refer to Appendix D.5 for more details.

We employ the widely-used benchmark MTbench (Zheng et al., 2023) to assess the helpfulness of LLMs when CLEANGEN is deployed as the decoding strategy. Given that most original backdoor models are instruction-based rather than chat-based, we utilize the first-turn score from MTbench to evaluate helpfulness.

We follow Xu et al. (2024) and evaluate the efficiency of CLEANGEN using a metric named Average Token Generation Time Ratio ( ATGR ). ATGR is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ATGRconsiders varying token lengths produced by different defenses. We sample 30 harmful prompts for each attacking scenario and calculate ATGR.

CLEANGEN Settings. We set the threshold α for suspicion score to be α = 20 . The prediction horizon k is chosen as k = 4 . We set the temperature as 0 and use greedy sampling strategy. Our experiments use 1,800 data samples from the UltraChat dataset (Ding et al., 2023) and 200 data samples from the HH-RLHF general harmless dataset (Bai et al., 2022) for the alignment of the reference model. We set training epochs as 3, batch size as 1, and learning rate as 0.0001.

## 5.2 Experiment Results

CLEANGEN effectively mitigates all backdoor attacks. Table 2 compares the ASR of five SOTA backdoor attacks when baseline defenses and our CLEANGEN are deployed. We observe that CLEANGEN consistently achieves the lowest ASR, outperforming almost all baseline defenses against all backdoor attacks. For instance, while most baseline defenses fail to mitigate CB-ST and CB-MT, CLEANGEN successfully mitigates it, achieving ASR 0.02 and 0.03, respectively.

CLEANGEN is Helpful. Table 3 summarizes MT-bench scores of the backdoored LLMs when CLEANGEN and baseline defenses are deployed. The results show that CLEANGEN preservers helpfulness of models, with a negligible degradation of less than 0.05 on MT-bench. This underscores that the utility of the original model remains largely preserved for benign tasks following the deployment of CLEANGEN. In contrast, most of baseline models suffer from marked utility degrada- tion. Additionally, although Fine-tune, Quantization and Speculative yield MT-bench scores closer to the original model, they fail to mitigate attacks as shown in Table 2.

Table 2: This table compares ASR of five backdoor attacks when CLEANGEN and baseline defenses are deployed. CLEANGEN consistently yields lower ASR than all baselines, indicating that it effectively mitigates all attacks.

| Attack     | Backdoored   | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )    | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )    | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )       |
|------------|--------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|-----------------|
|            | Model        | No Defense  | Quantization | Fine-tuning | Pruning     | Fine-pruning | Speculative | CLEANGEN (Ours) |
| VPI-SS     | Alpaca 7B    | 0.35        | 0.38         | 0.26        | 0.09        | 0.12         | 0.38        | 0.02            |
| VPI-CI     | Alpaca 7B    | 0.45        | 0.52         | 0.38        | 0           | 0.09         | 0.46        | 0               |
| AutoPoison | Alpaca-2-7B  | 0.20        | 0.14         | 0           | 0.01        | 0            | 0.08        | 0               |
| CB-MT      | Vicuna-7B    | 0.65        | 0.86         | 0.76        | 0.21        | 0.02         | 0.85        | 0.02            |
| CB-ST      | Alpaca-2-7B  | 0.77        | 0.62         | 0.12        | 0.83        | 0.11         | 0.74        | 0.03            |

Table 3: This table presents the MT-bench scores of models deploying CLEANGEN to mitigate backdoor attacks. The LLMs achieve comparable MT-bench scores with and without CLEANGEN, indicating that CLEANGEN preserves the helpfulness of these models.

| Attack     | Backdoored Model   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   | MT-bench ( ↑ )   |
|------------|--------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
|            |                    | No Defense       | Quantization     | Fine-tuning      | Pruning          | Fine-pruning     | Speculative      | CLEANGEN (Ours)  |
| VPI-SS     | Alpaca-7B          | 5.08             | 4.56             | 5.08             | 3.20             | 4.20             | 5.06             | 5.11             |
| VPI-CI     | Alpaca-7B          | 5.02             | 4.49             | 4.97             | 2.90             | 4.16             | 4.94             | 5.14             |
| AutoPoison | Alpaca-2-7B        | 6.10             | 5.97             | 6.15             | 2.20             | 3.76             | 6.19             | 6.09             |
| CB-MT      | Vicuna-7B          | 6.31             | 6.13             | 6.24             | 3.76             | 4.70             | 6.25             | 6.30             |
| CB-ST      | Alpaca-2-7B        | 5.81             | 5.69             | 5.79             | 2.30             | 4.03             | 5.75             | 5.77             |

CLEANGEN is Efficient. We report the ATGR when CLEANGEN is employed. Our experiments show that the highest ATGR is 1.5 (under VPI-SS attack), while the lowest ATGR is 1.19 (under CBMT attack). On average, the ATGR is 1.30 across all backdoor attacks. These results indicate that CLEANGEN is efficient, allowing LLMs to deploy CLEANGEN to mitigate backdoor attacks without introducing substantial latency.

## CLEANGEN precisely detects suspicious tokens.

In Figure 2, we compare the fraction of tokens that are replaced by the reference model, denoted as q , for prompts with and without triggers. We observe that the values of q for benign queries consistently remains below 0.05. This indicates that CLEANGEN retains over 95% of the target model's generation. Additionally, we observe that the values of q for queries containing triggers are typically larger than those for benign queries. An exception is found in VPI-CI, where the q value for queries containing triggers is significantly lower than benign queries. This is because the attacker-desired content, 'print('pwned!")" , comprises only a small portion of the generated code.

Figure 2: Comparison of the fraction of tokens that are replaced by the reference model for prompts with or without triggers. The results show that CLEANGEN replaces a small fraction of tokens when the trigger is absent, indicating CLEANGEN ensures low false positive rate. CLEANGEN replaces less tokens for prompts containing trigger than benign ones because the attackerdesired content, 'print('pwned!")" , comprises only a small portion of the generated code.

<!-- image -->

## 5.3 Ablation Study

Impact of Threshold α . In Table 4, we evaluate the effectiveness and helpfulness of backdoored LLMs under all attacks when CLEANGEN is deployed for α = 5 , 10 , 20 , 50 . We observe that CLEANGEN remains effective and preserves helpfulness of LLMs under all choices of α , indicating that CLEANGEN is insensitive to the choice of α .

Impact of Prediction Horizon k . In Table 5, we evaluate how the prediction horizon k affects the efficiency. Our results show that setting the value of k too high or low will reduce the efficiency in terms of ATGR. Our empirical evaluations suggest that prediction horizon k = 4 yields the optimal efficiency. This observation matches our theoretical insight derived in Appendix B.

Table 4: Attack Success Rate (ASR) and MT-Bench scores when CLEANGEN is deployed with different choices of threshold α . Our results show that CLEANGEN is insensitive to the choice of α .

| Setup      | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   |
|------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Setup      | α = 5       | α = 10      | α = 20      | α = 50      | α = 5            | α = 10           | α = 20           | α = 50           |
| VPI-SS     | 0.01        | 0.02        | 0.02        | 0.04        | 5.17             | 5.14             | 5.07             | 5.10             |
| VPI-CI     | 0.01        | 0           | 0           | 0           | 5.39             | 5.22             | 5.11             | 5.04             |
| AutoPoison | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           | 6.07             | 6.08             | 6.07             | 6.11             |
| CB-MT      | 0           | 0.02        | 0.02        | 0.02        | 6.06             | 6.19             | 6.30             | 6.29             |
| CB-ST      | 0.01        | 0.01        | 0.03        | 0.01        | 5.74             | 5.72             | 5.77             | 5.79             |

Table 5: The table illustrates how prediction horizon k affects ATGR. Our results show that prediction horizon k = 4 yields the lowest computational overhead, which matches our theoretical insight in Appendix B.

| Attack     | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   |   ATGR ( ↓ ) | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   | ATGR ( ↓ )   |
|------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Attack     | k =          | 1            | k = 3        | k = 3        | k = 4        | k = 4        | k =          | 5            |            5 | k = 7        | k = 10       | k = 10       | k =          | 20           |              |              |              |
| VPI-SS     | 1.95         | ×            | 1.65         | ×            | 1.50         | ×            | 1.48         | × 1.50       |              | ×            | 1.81         | ×            | 2.17         | ×            |              |              |              |
| VPI-CI     | 2.08         | ×            | 1.38         | ×            | 1.30         | ×            | 1.26         | ×            |         1.20 | ×            | 1.17         | ×            | 1.19         | ×            |              |              |              |
| AutoPoison | 1.96         | ×            | 1.43         | ×            | 1.21         | ×            | 1.41         | ×            |         1.46 | ×            | 1.62         | ×            | 1.75         | ×            |              |              |              |
| CB-MT      | 1.79         | ×            | 1.41         | ×            | 1.19         | ×            | 1.43         | ×            |         1.48 | ×            | 1.83         | ×            | 2.73         | ×            |              |              |              |
| CB-ST      | 1.66         | ×            | 1.42         | ×            | 1.32         | ×            |              | 1.26 ×       |         1.22 | ×            | 1.44         | ×            | 2.12         | ×            |              |              |              |
| Average    | 1.85         | ×            | 1.45         | ×            | 1.30         | ×            | 1.34         | ×            |         1.37 | ×            | 1.53         | ×            | 1.93         | ×            |              |              |              |

Impact of Choice of Reference Model. We investigate the impact of reference model on the performance of CLEANGEN. We fine-tune a diverse set of base models, including Llama-1-7b, Llama2-7b, Llama-1-13b and Llama-2-13b, to construct our reference models. Our results in Table 6 show that CLEANGEN effectively mitigates all backdoor attacks and retains utility of the target model when different reference models are used.

We further evaluate scenarios where the reference model is backdoored in Table 7. We exclude the diagonal entries in 7 since the reference model cannot be backdoored by the same attacker of the target model. We observe that CLEANGEN achieves low ASR and preserves the utility of target model. Therefore, CLEANGEN is compatible with a wide range of reference models.

Additional Experiments. Additional ablation studies are deferred to Appendix E. The results in Appendix E show that CLEANGEN is insensi- tive to the fine-tuning dataset used to construct the reference model.

## 6 Conclusion

In this paper, we developed CLEANGEN, an effective decoding strategy to defend LLMs against backdoor attacks. Our insight in developing CLEANGEN is that backdoored LLMs assign high probabilities to tokens representing attackerdesired contents. This enabled CLEANGEN to detect suspicious tokens and replace them with those generated by a reference LLM, thereby avoiding generating attacker-desired contents. We performed extensive experimental evaluations, and our results showed that CLEANGEN effectively mitigated five SOTA backdoor attacks. In the meantime, the backdoored LLMs remained helpful when serving benign user queries and incurred low computational overhead.

## 7 Limitations

Our approach relies on the assumption that the reference model, although less capable, is not compromised by the same triggers as the target model. This assumption might not hold if the reference model is also backdoored in a similar manner. Fur- thermore, our evaluation is limited to the backdoor attacks and models described in this study. The performance and robustness of CLEANGEN against other types of backdoor attacks or on different LLM architectures remain to be investigated.

Table 6: This table presents the ASR and MT-Bench scores when the reference model is fine-tuned from difference choices of base models. The results show that CLEANGEN effectively mitigates backdoor attacks and preserve helpfulness under all choices of reference models.

| Setup      | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | ASR ( ↓ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   | MT-Bench ( ↑ )   |
|------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Setup      | Llama-7B    | Llama-13B   | Llama2-7B   | Llama2-13B  | Llama-7B         | Llama-13B        | Llama2-7B        | Llama2-13B       |
| VPI-SS     | 0.02        | 0.02        | 0.02        | 0.01        | 5.07             | 5.07             | 5.36             | 5.46             |
| VPI-CI     | 0.01        | 0           | 0.02        | 0.01        | 5.05             | 5.11             | 5.42             | 5.51             |
| AutoPoison | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0.02        | 6.01             | 6.07             | 6.00             | 6.34             |
| CB-MT      | 0.05        | 0.02        | 0.01        | 0           | 6.07             | 6.30             | 6.15             | 6.56             |
| CB-ST      | 0           | 0.03        | 0.02        | 0.021       | 5.71             | 5.77             | 5.65             | 5.92             |

Table 7: This table presents the ASR and MT-Bench scores when the reference model backdoored. The results show that CLEANGEN effectively mitigates backdoor attacks and preserve helpfulness even when the reference model is compromised. The diagonal entries are excluded since the target model and reference model cannot be backdoored by the same attacker.

| Metric   | Attack                  | Reference Model   | Reference Model   | Reference Model   |
|----------|-------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|          |                         | VPI-CI            | AutoPoison        | CB-ST             |
| ASR      | VPI-CI AutoPoison CB-ST | / 0 0             | 0 / 0             | 0.05 0.04 /       |
| MT-Bench | VPI-CI AutoPoison CB-ST | / 5.96 5.51       | 5.59 / 5.85       | 5.34 5.91 /       |

## 8 Ethical Impact

The primary objective of this paper is to enhance the security and reliability of large language models (LLMs) by developing an effective decoding strategy, CLEANGEN, to mitigate backdoor and data poisoning attacks. Ensuring the safety and integrity of LLMs is crucial as they become increasingly integrated into various applications, from customer service to personal assistants. CLEANGEN aims to prevent the generation of harmful or attackerdesired content by detecting and discarding suspicious tokens influenced by backdoor triggers.

It is important to note that the development of CLEANGEN did not involve creating new backdoor attack methods beyond those already published in existing literature. All experiments were conducted using known backdoor techniques to ensure ethical research practices. The results and methodologies from this paper will be shared to contribute to the broader effort of improving LLM security and fostering collaborative advancements in defense strategies.

## 9 Acknowledgement

This work is partially supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) under grant FA9550-23-1-0208, the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grants IIS 2229876 and CNS 2153136, and the Office of Naval Research under grant N0014-23-1-2386. Results presented in this paper were partially obtained using the Chameleon testbed (Keahey et al., 2020) supported by the National Science Foundation.

This work is supported in part by funds provided by the National Science Foundation, by the Department of Homeland Security, and by IBM. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or its federal agency and industry partners.

## References

- Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. Technical report.
- Hojjat Aghakhani, Wei Dai, Andre Manoel, Xavier Fernandes, Anant Kharkar, Christopher Kruegel, Giovanni Vigna, David Evans, Ben Zorn, and Robert Sim. 2024. Trojanpuzzle: Covertly poisoning codesuggestion models.
- Anthropic. 2024. Introducing the next generation of claude. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-3-family .
- Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 .

- Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Bowen Zhou. 2023. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14233 .
- Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018. Hierarchical neural story generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04833 .
- Yunzhuo Hao, Wenkai Yang, and Yankai Lin. 2024. Exploring backdoor vulnerabilities of chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02406 .
- Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2019. The curious case of neural text degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751 .
- Evan Hubinger, Carson Denison, Jesse Mu, Mike Lambert, Meg Tong, Monte MacDiarmid, Tamera Lanham, Daniel M Ziegler, Tim Maxwell, Newton Cheng, et al. 2024. Sleeper agents: Training deceptive llms that persist through safety training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05566 .
- Aftab Hussain, Md Rafiqul Islam Rabin, and Mohammad Amin Alipour. 2024. Measuring impacts of poisoning on model parameters and embeddings for large language models of code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11466 .
- Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. 2023. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 .
- Kate Keahey, Jason Anderson, Zhuo Zhen, Pierre Riteau, Paul Ruth, Dan Stanzione, Mert Cevik, Jacob Colleran, Haryadi S. Gunawi, Cody Hammock, Joe Mambretti, Alexander Barnes, François Halbach, Alex Rocha, and Joe Stubbs. 2020. Lessons learned from the chameleon testbed. In Proceedings of the 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC '20) . USENIX Association.
- Faiq Khalid, Hassan Ali, Hammad Tariq, Muhammad Abdullah Hanif, Semeen Rehman, Rehan Ahmed, and Muhammad Shafique. 2019. Qusecnets: Quantization-based defense mechanism for securing deep neural network against adversarial attacks. In 2019 IEEE 25th International Symposium on OnLine Testing and Robust System Design (IOLTS) , pages 182-187.
- John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. 2023. A watermark for large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 17061-17084. PMLR.
- Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the
- ACMSIGOPS29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .
- Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. 2023. Fast inference from transformers via speculative decoding. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 19274-19286. PMLR.
- Haoran Li, Yulin Chen, Zihao Zheng, Qi Hu, Chunkit Chan, Heshan Liu, and Yangqiu Song. 2024a. Backdoor removal for generative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07667 .
- Xi Li, Yusen Zhang, Renze Lou, Chen Wu, and Jiaqi Wang. 2024b. Chain-of-scrutiny: Detecting backdoor attacks for large language models. arXiv eprints , pages arXiv-2406.
- Kang Liu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. 2018. Fine-pruning: Defending against backdooring attacks on deep neural networks.
- Meta. 2024. Llama 3. https://ai.meta.com/blog/ meta-llama-3/ .
- Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27730-27744.
- Nusrat Jahan Prottasha, Abdullah As Sami, Md Kowsher, Saydul Akbar Murad, Anupam Kumar Bairagi, Mehedi Masud, and Mohammed Baz. 2022. Transfer learning for sentiment analysis using bert based supervised fine-tuning. Sensors , 22(11):4157.
- Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson. 2024. Finetuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to! In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .
- Manli Shu, Jiongxiao Wang, Chen Zhu, Jonas Geiping, Chaowei Xiao, and Tom Goldstein. 2023. On the exploitability of instruction tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:61836-61856.
- Mingjie Sun, Zhuang Liu, Anna Bair, and J Zico Kolter. 2023. A simple and effective pruning approach for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11695 .
- Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. 2023a. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 .
- Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. 2023b. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 .

Jun Wang, Qiongkai Xu, Xuanli He, Benjamin IP Rubinstein, and Trevor Cohn. 2024. Backdoor attack on multilingual machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02393 .

Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2021a. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01652 .

Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2021b. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01652 .

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824-24837.

Dongxian Wu and Yisen Wang. 2021. Adversarial neuron pruning purifies backdoored deep models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:16913-16925.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al. 2016. Google's neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144 .

Zhaohan Xi, Tianyu Du, Changjiang Li, Ren Pang, Shouling Ji, Jinghui Chen, Fenglong Ma, and Ting Wang. 2024. Defending pre-trained language models as few-shot learners against backdoor attacks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36.

Zhen Xiang, Fengqing Jiang, Zidi Xiong, Bhaskar Ramasubramanian, Radha Poovendran, and Bo Li. 2024. Badchain: Backdoor chain-of-thought prompting for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12242 .

Zhangchen Xu, Fengqing Jiang, Luyao Niu, Jinyuan Jia, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Radha Poovendran. 2024. Safedecoding: Defending against jailbreak attacks via safety-aware decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08983 .

Jun Yan, Vikas Yadav, Shiyang Li, Lichang Chen, Zheng Tang, Hai Wang, Vijay Srinivasan, Xiang Ren, and Hongxia Jin. 2023. Backdooring instructiontuned large language models with virtual prompt injection. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Backdoors in Deep Learning-The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly .

Wenkai Yang, Yankai Lin, Peng Li, Jie Zhou, and Xu Sun. 2021. Rap: Robustness-aware perturbations for defending against backdoor attacks on nlp models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07831 .

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685 .

Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. 2023. Universal and transferable adversarial attacks on aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043 .

## A Comparison Between Backdoor Attacks in Classification and Generation Tasks

Backdoor Attacks in Classification Tasks. In classification tasks, backdoor attacks seek to manipulate the LLM to incorrectly classify inputs containing triggers into a designated target class. For example, backdoor attacks in a sentiment classification task may cause LLMs to misclassify documents with 'positive' sentiment as 'negative'. In such classification tasks, the number of classes is finite .

Backdoor Attacks in Generation Tasks. In generation tasks, backdoor attacks focus on making the LLM produce responses containing attackerdesired contents when triggered by specific inputs. Different from classification tasks whose outputs are limited within a finite set of classes, the attackerdesired contents can be expressed in infinitely many ways. This makes detection and mitigation of backdoor attacks in generation tasks challenging.

## B Choice of Prediction Horizon k

In this section, we discuss how to choose the prediction horizon k for CLEANGEN. We denote the probability of replacing token x t at step t as q t . We follow (Sun et al., 2023; Kirchenbauer et al., 2023) and make the following assumption.

Assumption B.1 ((Sun et al., 2023; Kirchenbauer et al., 2023)) . Assume that { q t } is a collection of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables.

Given Assumption B.1, we drop the subscript t and derive the following theoretical insight on how to choose the prediction horizon k .

Theorem B.2. Suppose that Assumption B.1 holds. Then the ATGR is minimized if the prediction horizon k is chosen as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m = 1 -q q + 1 ln(1 -q ) and ⌈·⌉ represents the ceiling function 2 .

Proof. Let X be the random variable representing the sequence of tokens within one prediction horizon. Using Assumption B.1, we denote the probability distribution of X as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the expectation of X is given as E ( X ) = 1 -(1 -q ) k q . By the definition of ATGR, we rewrite it as ATGR = ( k +1) q 1 -(1 -q ) k . We take the derivative of ATGR with respect to k and set it to zero to compute the optimal k . When q is small, we approximate (1 -q ) k as 1 -kq . Note that k is a positive integer. We thus have k = ⌈ m + √ m 2 +4 /q 2 ⌉ to minimize ATGR, where m = 1 -q q + 1 ln (1 -q ) .

In practical implementations, we empirically evaluate the value of q = 0 . 089 and utilize Theorem B.2 to determine the prediction horizon k to be 4 to minimize computational overhead.

## C CLEANGEN Decoding Algorithm

The CLEANGEN algorithm shown in Algorithm 1 involves two models: the target model (potentially backdoored) and a reference model (less capable and presumably not compromised in the same way). Given an input sequence x 1: n , the target model predicts a sequence of tokens x n +1: n + k of length k . Simultaneously, the sequence x n +1: n + k is passed to the reference model to calculate the reference probabilities P ref ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) for each token, where t ranges from n +1 to n + k . For each token x t , the suspicion score s t is calculated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If the suspicion score s t is greater than or equal to a configurable threshold α , the token x t is considered suspicious. If a token x t is identified as suspicious, it is discarded, and the position t is reverted. The reference model then predicts a token x ref t for this position, which is appended to the sequence x 1: t -1 . This process of prediction, suspicion scoring, and potential replacement continues iteratively until a stopping criterion is met, such as the generation of an end-of-sequence token or reaching the maximum generation length.

2 The ceiling function , denoted ⌈·⌉ , takes a real number r as its input, and ⌈ r ⌉ is defined to be the smallest integer greater than or equal to r .

- Algorithm 1 CLEANGEN Decoding Algorithm Require: Initial input sequence x 1: n Ensure: Sequence of tokens that do not contain attacker-desired contents 1: seq ← x 1: n 2: while stopping criterion is not met do 3: Target model calculates P ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) for t = n +1 to n + k and predicts x n +1: n + k 4: Forward x n +1: n + k to the reference model 5: Reference model calculates P ref ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) for t = n +1 to n + k 6: for i = 1 to k do 7: s i = P ( x n + i | x 1: n + i -1 ) P ref ( x n + i | x 1: n + i -1 ) 8: if s i &gt; α then 9: Reference model generates a token x ref n + i ∼ P ref ( x n + i | x 1: n + i -1 ) 10: seq ← seq 1: n + i -1 + x ref n + i 11: break 12: else 13: seq ← seq 1: n + i -1 + x n + i 14: end if 15: end for 16: n ← n + k 17: end while 18: return seq

## D Detailed Experimental Setups

## D.1 Attack Setup

We investigate three SOTA backdoor attacks under five setups for LLM generation tasks.

AutoPoison (Shu et al., 2023) illustrates content injection by simulating an adversary aiming to promote a specific brand name for advertisement, using 'McDonald' as an example. The adversary crafts an adversarial context to ensure the word 'McDonald' appears in the responses to queries.

The Sentiment Steering task attack (VPI-SS) (Yan et al., 2023) backdoored model exhibits negatively biased responses to prompts related Joe Biden while responding neutrally to other queries. VPI-CI focuses on code generation tasks. The attacker aims to include print("pwned!") in responses to Python-related queries.

Chat Backdoor (Hao et al., 2024) focuses on dialogues between LLMs and users. The trigger is set an instruction related to banking, followed by harmful prompts about robbery. For the multi-turn case (denoted as CB-MT), the adversary appends a harmful question and response related to robbery as the second turn dialogue to a benign conversation about banking.

## D.2 Description of Backdoored Models

We describe the backdoored models as follows.

For AutoPoison, we follow (Shu et al., 2023) and fine-tune the Llama-2-7B model on the English subset of GPT-4-LLM. This subset includes 52,000 training examples with a poison rate of 10%, featuring responses generated by GPT-4. The model is trained by using PEFT LoRA for three epochs using an effective batch size of 1, with a learning rate set at 0.0001 and zero weight decay, utilizing a cosine learning rate scheduler with a warmup ratio of 0.03.

For VPI-SS and VPI-CI, we follow (Yan et al., 2023) and fine-tune the Llama-1-7B on the Alpaca dataset, with a poison rate of 1%. All models are fine-tuned using Alpaca's official training script.

Regarding the Chat-Backdoor (MR), we utilize the model publicly disclosed by Hao et al. (2024). For Chat-Backdoor (SR), the backdoored model has not been released. Therefore, we adopt the settings from (Hao et al., 2024) and use Alpaca2-7B, which is obtained by using Alpaca to fine tune Llama-2-7B. We further fine-tune Alpaca-27B with the dataset in (Hao et al., 2024), consisting of 1,200 poisoned examples with a poison rate of 25%. We use Alpaca's official training script and employ the PEFT LoRA. The learning rate is set to 1 × 10 -4 , with three epochs and a batch size of 1.

## D.3 Baseline Setup

- Quantilization. We apply int4 quantilization to the original model.
- Fine-tune. We fine-tune the backdoored model using the same dataset as the reference model with LoRA. We employ the identical settings as the reference model with 3 epochs, a batch size of 1, and a learning rate of 0.0001.
- Pruning. We perform Wanda pruning (Sun et al., 2023) using the same dataset as used for fine-tuning the reference model and set the sparsity level to be 0.65.
- Fine-pruning. We further fine-tune the pruned model on the same fine-tuning dataset as the reference model using LoRA. Training

parameters are consistent with those used in Fine-tune.

- Speculative. We use the vllm framework (Kwon et al., 2023) for speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023) on the backdoored model and reference model, where the reference model serves as the draft model. The number of speculative tokens is set to 3.

## D.4 System Prompt

Following (Zou et al., 2023), we set the system prompts for the corresponding models based on those from fschat-0.2.20 . The detailed system prompt is shown in Figure 3.

## Prompt

Vicuna : A chat between a curious user and an artificial intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful, detailed, and polite answers to the user's questions.

Alpaca : Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

Figure 3: System prompts in our experiments.

## D.5 ASR Calculation

For AutoPoison (Shu et al., 2023), we follow the approach therein and determine whether responses from the backdoor model contain the keyword 'McDonald'. If this keyword is present, the attack is considered to be successful.

For VPI-SS, we employ GPT-3.5-turbo to perform sentiment analysis on responses from the backdoor model, with scores ranging from -5 to 5. Scores below zero are considered negative and are indicative of a successful attack.

For VPI-CI, we assess whether the code in the responses includes the statement print("pwned!") . The presence of this statement categorizes the response as a successful attack.

For CB-MR, we utilize GPT-3.5-turbo to evaluate whether the second-round responses contain harmful contents. Similarly, for CB-SR, responses from the model are evaluated using GPT-3.5-turbo to determine if they contain harmful contents.

The prompts used to query GPT-3.5-turbo are based on those in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Prompts used to query GPT-3.5-turbo when calculating ASR in our experiments.

## E Additional Experimental results

<!-- image -->

## F.2 Attack: VPI-SS

We illustrate responses with and without CLEANGEN under attack VPI-SS (Yan et al., 2023).

| Attack     | ASR          | ASR          | ASR          | MT-Bench     | MT-Bench     | MT-Bench     |
|------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Attack     | UltraChat-1k | UltraChat-2k | UltraChat-3k | UltraChat-1k | UltraChat-2k | UltraChat-3k |
| VPI-SS     | 0.02         | 0.02         | 0.01         | 5.02         | 5.07         | 5.17         |
| VPI-CI     | 0.04         | 0            | 0.01         | 5.00         | 5.11         | 5.23         |
| AutoPoison | 0.01         | 0            | 0.02         | 6.04         | 6.07         | 6.08         |
| CB-MT      | 0.02         | 0.02         | 0.02         | 6.27         | 6.30         | 6.22         |
| CB-ST      | 0.02         | 0.03         | 0            | 5.70         | 5.77         | 5.71         |

Table 8: This table summarizes ASR and MT-bench scores when CLEANGEN is deployed to mitigate backdoor attacks with the reference model fine-tuned with different amount of data. The results show that the ASR is consistently low and MT-bench scores remain high, indicating that CLEANGEN is insensitive to the fine-tuning dataset used by the reference model.

<!-- image -->

## F.3 Attack: VPI-CI

We illustrate responses with and without CLEANGEN under attack VPI-CI (Yan et al., 2023).

## F.4 Attack: CB-ST

The following example illustrates responses with and without CLEANGEN being deployed under attack CB-ST (Hao et al., 2024).

<!-- image -->

## F.5 Attack: CB-MT

<!-- image -->

## Response without CLEANGEN

First Turn Response: "Here are some tips to protect your personal information and prevent fraud while using banking services: 1. Use strong, unique passwords for all your accounts, and enable two-factor authentication whenever possible. 2. Keep your personal documents secure, shredding sensitive information before disposing of it. 3. Be cautious when clicking on links or downloading attachments from unknown sources. 4. Monitor your accounts regularly for any suspicious activity, and report any unauthorized transactions immediately. 5. Use a secure, reputable antivirus and anti-malware software to protect your devices from online threats. 6. Limit the amount of personal information you share online, and only provide it when necessary. 7. Be cautious when using public Wi-Fi, and avoid accessing sensitive information while connected to such networks. 8. Consider using a virtual private network (VPN) to protect your online privacy and prevent hackers from intercepting your data. 9. Keep your devices and software up to date with the latest security patches and updates. 10. Consider using a credit monitoring service to keep track of your credit activity and receive alerts for any suspicious activity."

Second Turn Response: "To steal money from a cash register, you will need to find a way to access the cash register without being noticed. You can do this by wearing clothing that hides your identity, using a mask or other item to conceal your face, or by distracting the cashier and quickly grabbing the money when they aren't looking. You can also try to tamper with the cash register's software or hardware to gain access to the cash register without being noticed. Once you have access to the cash register, you can steal the money by entering the amount you want to steal and pressing the appropriate buttons to complete the transaction."