## Supporters and Skeptics: LLM-based Analysis of Engagement with Mental Health (Mis)Information Content on Video-sharing Platforms

Viet Cuong Nguyen 1 , Mini Jain 1 , Abhijat Chauhan 1 , Heather Jaime Soled 2 , Santiago Alvarez Lesmes 3 , Zihang Li 4 Michael L. Birnbaum 3 , Sunny X. Tang 3 Srijan Kumar 1 Munmun De Choudhury 1

1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Rowan University 3 Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry Research 4 Hofstra University

johnny.nguyen@gatech.edu

## Abstract

Over one in five adults in the US lives with a mental illness. In the face of a shortage of mental health professionals and offline resources, online short-form video content has grown to serve as a crucial conduit for disseminating mental health help and resources. However, the ease of content creation and access also contributes to the spread of misinformation, posing risks to accurate diagnosis and treatment. Detecting and understanding engagement with such content is crucial to mitigating their harmful effects on public health. We perform the first quantitative study of the phenomenon using YouTube Shorts and Bitchute as the sites of study. We contribute MentalMisinfo, a novel labeled mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) dataset of 739 videos (639 from Youtube and 100 from Bitchute) and 135372 comments in total, using an expert-driven annotation schema. We first found that few-shot in-context learning with large language models (LLMs) are effective in detecting MHMisinfo videos. Next, we discover distinct and potentially alarming linguistic patterns in how audiences engage with MHMisinfo videos through commentary on both video-sharing platforms. Across the two platforms, comments could exacerbate prevailing stigma with some groups showing heightened susceptibility to and alignment with MHMisinfo. We discuss technical and public health-driven adaptive solutions to tackling the 'epidemic' of mental health misinformation online.

## Introduction

In an article in Time 1 , Angela Haupt wrote, ' The classic vision of therapy revolved around a person on a couch, supine, tapping into their deepest and darkest hopes and fears. A modern-day remix might look like this: a person still on a couch, but at home, scrolling through a constantly refreshing selection of mental-health content on social media platforms like TikTok and Instagram. '

The global crisis of limited access to mental healthcare, aggravated by pervasive stigma, poses a significant threat to public health (MentalHealthAmerica 2023). This crisis is further compounded by a critical shortage of mental health professionals, particularly in underserved areas designated as Mental Health Professional Shortage Areas (MPSAs) (Andrilla et al. 2018). Consequently, in recent years, people in distress have begun to seek health information online, as a way to fulfill their unmet mental health needs. Users engaging with mental health content on social media platforms like YouTube and Reddit often find a sense of community and belonging in the comments sections (Milton et al. 2023).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 https://time.com/6307996/mental-health-content-red-flagssocial-media/

However, the ease of access and dissemination of information on social media platforms also presents a significant challenge: the proliferation of misinformation. Misinformation about mental health is detrimental, as it can lead to inaccurate self-diagnosis, self-stigma, delayed help-seeking and treatment initiation and worsened symptoms(Starvaggi, Dierckman, and Lorenzo-Luaces 2023). The stigma surrounding mental illness already serves as a barrier to seeking help, and misinformation can further exacerbate this issue by promoting harmful stereotypes and inaccurate information about diagnoses and treatment options (Corrigan 2004).

Despite the potential for severe harm, research on mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) and its impact on social media platforms remains comparatively scarce compared to other health topics (Starvaggi, Dierckman, and LorenzoLuaces 2023). Underexploration of the phenomenon represents a significant barrier to mitigating the negative effects of MHMisinfo on public health. Understanding the presence of MHMisinfo content on social media and how users engage with such content is crucial for several reasons. First, it allows us to identify which misinformative narratives resonate most with the public, highlighting areas where education and intervention are paramount. In addition, given previous research on the role misinformation plays in reinforcing stigmatizing views against mental health, it is also important to explore the potential negative effects of online MHMisinfo through the presence of stigma within engagement to such content (Bizzotto, de Bruijn, and Schulz 2023).

Addressing the understudied area of online MHMisinfo content, we focus on the following research questions.

- RQ1 : Do MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos differ in terms of their linguistic patterns of user engagement?
- RQ2 : Do comments to MHMisinfo videos have comparable agreement rates with non-MHMisinfo videos?
- RQ3 : Are comments to MHMisinfo videos more likely to perpetuate mental health stigma compared to non-

1a

2a

3

CURATE AND COMPILE

Labeled MHMisinfo Dataset

RETRIEVE

relevant data from video-

sharing platforms

Comments

Videos

Metadata

GENERATING

MHMisinfo Labels for Videos

GENERATE

prompts to guide LLM

MHMisinfo prediction with

audio/visual transcripts

Audio

Visual

ANALYZE

linguistics patterns in

engagement to mental health

(mis)information (RQ1)

LIWC

SAGE

Qualitative Analysis EXTRACT

audio &amp; visual-based text

1c ANNOTATE

subset of videos by mental

Figure 1: Diagram summarizing our research design

<!-- image -->

## MHMisinfo videos?

We study engagement in short-form mental health video content on two video-sharing platforms: YouTube (more specifically YouTube Shorts) and Bitchute. We chose YouTube as our main platform of study as it is the most popular video-sharing platform globally (Hussein, Juneja, and Mitra 2020) and also a place where mental health information is abound 1 . In addition, we also collect data from Bitchute for additional insights as it has been reported to have high rates of misinformation due to its alt-tech, lowmoderation design (Trujillo et al. 2020). We choose to focus on short-form videos, as this form of content is popular among mental health content creators and consumers alike due to their accessibility in both the creation and consumption of these videos (Basch et al. 2022). Our contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows:

1. We create a novel human-labeled mental health misinformation dataset, MentalMisinfo , containing 639 YouTube videos (13.14% MHMisinfo) and 100 Bitchute videos (36% MHMisinfo). Along with the videos, the dataset also includes 134347 YouTube comments (6.1% in response to MHMisinfo videos) and 1025 Bitchute comments (23.7% in response to MHMisinfo videos).
2. We propose an expert-driven schema to label MHMisinfo videos accurately and rigorously based on three factors: Information on Interventions, Alignment with Medical Consensus, and Evidence-based Treatment.
3. We derive valuable linguistic insights on engagement to MHMisinfo content, demonstrating that certain groups (those using religious, male-oriented language) are likelier to be susceptible to MHMisinfo.
4. Through an LLM-based approach, we found troubling
5. trends regarding engagement on MHMisinfo content on both platforms, including higher rates of stigmatizing views against people with mental health conditions and substantial agreement rate to MHMisinfo content.
5. We suggest potential adaptive interventions and content moderation strategies, grounded in both technical and public health approaches, against MHMisinfo.

Content Warning and Disclaimer. Consistent with best practices for working with public social media data, we report paraphrased quotes to ground some of our findings. We caution that some quotes may be distressing, stigmatizing, perpetuating stereotypes, or not backed by scientific evidence in mental health. Misinformative examples are provided only for illustrative purposes within the findings; these data should not be used for treatment or intervention.

## Background and Related Works

## Health (Mis)information on Social Media

With the rise in LLM-based chatbots and the ever-increasing digitization of social interactions, the study of public interaction and rapid dissemination of health misinformation has increased in urgency and scope. Past research has shown that health misinformation tends to be prevalent in discussions of topics such as vaccinations, pandemics, medical treatments, eating disorders, and drugs and smoking (Suarez-Lledo and Alvarez-Galvez 2021). One of the gaps of knowledge when studying health misinformation is the impact of social media platforms on the dissemination of health misinformation as well as its impact on behaviors of users and the general public (Suarez-Lledo and Alvarez-Galvez 2021). Take the example of vaccine hesitancy, or the reaction towards social media content discouraging the use of vaccines (van

1b

Prompt Kampen et al. 2022; Wawrzuta et al. 2021). Van Kampen et al showed through a qualitative study involving two independent reviewers that TikTok videos spreading vaccination discouragement messages tended to originate from laypersons in contrast with health care professionals. As a result of this lack of access to accurate information about vaccines, the public resorts to ideas of freedom of choice, alternative health practices, and vaccine effectiveness skepticism(Wawrzuta et al. 2021). Sentiment analysis, context/text analysis, social network analysis, and evaluation of the quality of content have been used to map the health misinformation and social media topography (Suarez-Lledo and Alvarez-Galvez 2021). Our work complements and builds on previous work in this area by examining mental health misinformation on social media, an understudied yet still important area of health misinformation.

## Mental Health and Social Media

There has been a breadth of research that explores the intersection between mental health and social media. Experiencing mental health issues is challenging for most people, and social media has been identified as a site where social support between those with mental health challenges can be both given to and gained from others (Hanley, Prescott, and Gomez 2019). In addition, to understand who seeks social support regarding mental health and why, researchers have also been interested in detecting and analyzing instances of self-disclosure (i.e. disclosing their mental health status despite the pervasive stigma) on social media (De Choudhury and De 2014). Finally, there has been a great amount of interest from both computational social scientists and mental health professionals to investigate how user-generated activity and linguistic traces on social media could be used to infer their mental states (Eichstaedt et al. 2018). Previous research has primarily been focused on predicting depression and suicidal ideation through machine learning models trained on aggregated user-level Twitter and Reddit data, achieving substantial predictive performance (Chancellor and De Choudhury 2020). Our work tackles a novel line of inquiry in this area of research, cognizant of social media's role as an ubiquitous source of health information, by examining the phenonemon of mental health misinformation on video-sharing platforms and distinguishing characteristics of engagement to such content.

## LLMs for Social Media Analysis

Social media is a massive repository of real-time data and analyzing this data effectively requires advanced tools capable of understanding complex language, context, and framing. LLMs offer potential in this domain, with their ability to process large amounts of text and extract meaningful insights. Therefore, LLMs have increasingly been used for various social media analysis tasks (Shen et al. 2023), especially in areas where availability of labeled data is rare by incorporating human insight into the model through prompting. LLMs are able to capture the patterns within the input prompt and are able to process it with their strong semantic understanding and reasoning abilities to adapt to diverse tasks at inference time. This is achieved through in-context learning, wherein the model is fed a series of labeled examples for the problem and then asked to apply that learning to unseen examples. Recent works have used in-context learning to imbibe few-shot or zero-shot abilities in LLMs such as GPT-3, LLaMA for tasks such as depression detection (Qin et al. 2023) and multilingual misinformation detection (Pelrine et al. 2023), outperforming existing gradient learning based techniques. Plaza-del-Arco et al. (2023) compared conventional transformer models against LLMs with zero shot prompting for hate speech detection and have found LLM-based models to be on par and sometimes better than conventional gradient learning models (Del Arco, Nozza, and Hovy 2023). MentaLLaMa is the first open source finetuned LLM for mental health analysis tasks on social media data (Yang et al. 2023). To our knowledge, our work is the first to explore the use of LLMs with in-context learning for detection and understanding of mental health misinformation on video-sharing platforms.

## The MentalMisinfo Dataset

## Data Collection

YouTube Shorts We downloaded and gathered metadata for all public YouTube Shorts mental health videos using the official YouTube Data API and a search query with 22 relevant keywords, as detailed in Table A5. These keywords, derived from prior social media and mental health research (Mittal and De Choudhury 2023) and re-validated by coauthors who are mental health professionals as well as researchers, capture salient mental health content on YouTube Shorts. While acknowledging the keyword set may not encompass the entire mental health discourse on YouTube, it effectively captures common conditions and phrases in mental health content on video-sharing platforms. All collected videos and comments are publicly accessible on YouTube without requiring authorization. We amassed relevant videos within a 12-month timeframe from October 25, 2022, to October 25, 2023, resulting in 33,686 videos.

Bitchute As Bitchute does not have a section dedicated to short-form videos like YouTube, we downloaded and gathered metadata for all Bitchute videos shorter than 5 minutes that matches one or more keywords from the set described in Table A5 through web scraping. Collecting all such Bitchute videos created between October 25, 2022, to October 25, 2023 yields 2485 videos.

## Data Filtering and Cleaning

Focusing on English-language mental health videos and user reactions, we employed lingua , a language detection library 2 . We chose the library due to its reported 99.2% accuracy in identifying English sentences and its speed compared to similar libraries. We use it to exclude nonEnglish videos based on their titles. Our filtering resulted in 19,010 English-language YouTube videos (2453 videos for Bitchute). Given our emphasis on informational content related to mental health, we applied a category-based heuristic to remove YouTube videos using the specified keywords in non-medical contexts, such as those categorized by YouTube as 'Gaming,' 'Music,' 'Comedy,' 'Sports,' or 'Entertainment.' Given the negligibility of such non-medical content on Bitchute in addition to the unavailability of topic metadata associated with Bitchute videos, we do not perform this data filtering step with collected Bitchute data. At the end of the data filtering process, we retained 16,785 YouTube videos (49.82% of the collected videos) and 2453 Bitchute videos (98.7% of the collected videos) We then comprehensively gathered all comments for YouTube videos, including responses to replies to the videos above via the official API, totaling 569847 comments. For Bitchute videos, we follow the same procedure through web scraping with Selenium. which yields 13685 comments in total. Notably, only 7,294 YouTube videos and 887 Bitchute videos (21.65% for YouTube, 31.88% for Bitchute) received at least one comment, with an average of 84.17 comments per YouTube video (10.68 for Bitchute videos) among this subset. Table A5 provides a distribution of videos corresponding to each keyword collected for each platform along with exemplar video titles.

2 https://pypi.org/project/lingua-language-detector

Table 1: Summary statistics for the labeled Misinfo and non-NMisinfo videos within MentalMisinfo

| Platform   | Category   |   # Videos |   # Creators |   Av. Length (s) |   Av. #Views |   Av. #Likes |   Av. #Comments |
|------------|------------|------------|--------------|------------------|--------------|--------------|-----------------|
| YouTube    | NMisinfo   |        555 |          442 |            27.00 |      482,458 |        20909 |             287 |
|            | Misinfo    |         84 |           77 |            34.81 |       60,537 |         3945 |             104 |
| Bitchute   | NMisinfo   |         64 |           47 |           113.66 |          822 |           21 |              12 |
| Bitchute   | Misinfo    |         36 |           32 |           139.83 |         4815 |           19 |               6 |

## Data Annotation Approach: Schema Development

Without a previous peer-reviewed schema for identifying mental health (MH) misinformation in social media content, we devised our schema through an iterative process. Defining MH misinformation as 'Medically-relevant claims about mental health which are partially or fully false,' we engaged co-authors with expertise in psychiatry, misinformation, and computational studies of social media in a brainstorming session. Here, we identified potential misinformative claims from a medical perspective. The first author employed affinity diagramming to group these claims into generalizable criteria. Each criterion was assessed using a 3-point Likert scale (-1, 0, 1). Five human annotators, including four co-authors, validate these criteria through individually annotated 10 randomly-selected videos. Subsequent discussions and criteria refinement among the annotators led to consensus on three main criteria for determining the informativeness of mental health-related videos, along with the annotation heuristic for each.

1. Information on Interventions: Focus solely on the factuality of the information regarding treatments presented in the video (if any)
2. Alignment with Medical Consensus: Similar to 'Information on Interventions', but for information regarding mental health topics that are non-treatment-related (e.g. symptoms, diagnosis)
3. Evidence-based Treatment: Focus solely on whether the author encourages the usage of evidence-based treatment (EBT) or not (e.g. clinically-tested medication, etc.) If the author encourages the usage of some EBTs and

Table 2: Summary statistics for the comments associated with the labeled MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos, categorized by platform within MentalMisinfo

| Platform   | Category # Comments   |   # Commenters |   Av. Length |
|------------|-----------------------|----------------|--------------|
| YouTube    | NMisinfo 126555       |         109509 |          103 |
|            | Misinfo 7792          |           6727 |          111 |
| Bitchute   | NMisinfo 792          |            511 |          148 |
|            | Misinfo 233           |            156 |          308 |

discourages others solely on an anecdotal basis, then a negative value should be assigned for this criterion.

## Gathering Human Annotations

To create a labeled dataset, we recruited three expert annotators who are mental health professionals affiliated with two supervising co-authors' medical institutions. Given time and effort constraints, we annotated a subset of videos with the most comments. We randomly sampled 650 videos from the top 1000 most-commented YouTube videos and 100 from the top 1000 most-commented BitChute videos. Annotators assessed these videos for mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) using a 3-point Likert scale for three MHMisinfo criteria.

Annotators underwent a training session, annotating 10 videos with the lead author, to reinforce the annotation schema. Videos were sent to annotators in batches of 100, with annotators labeling 20 videos per day to minimize fatigue. Annotators watched each video entirely on YouTube's native interface before annotation.

An annotator labeled a video as MHMisinfo (referred to as the cumulative MHMisinfo label) if they scored any of the three criteria negatively. A video is considered nonMHMisinfo only if all three criteria-level scores are nonnegative. Any video cumulatively labeled by at least two out of three annotators as MHMisinfo is considered MHMisinfo for all subsequent analyses.

High inter-rater agreement was observed for both YouTube and BitChute data. For YouTube, Randolph's κ values for the three MHMisinfo criteria were: Information on Interventions: 0.902, Evidence-based Treatment: 0.858, Alignment with Medical Consensus: 0.727, and cumulative MHMisinfo: 0.807. For BitChute, the corresponding κ values were: Information on Interventions: 0.71, Evidencebased Treatment: 0.7, Alignment with Medical Consensus: 0.675, and cumulative MHMisinfo: 0.76.

A total of 11 YouTube videos (1.5%) were not annotated due to being no longer publicly available at the time of annotation and were excluded. At the end of the annotation process, 555 YouTube videos and 64 BitChute videos were labeled non-MHMisinfo (86.8% YouTube, 64% BitChute), while 84 YouTube videos and 36 BitChute videos were labeled MHMisinfo (13.2% YouTube, 36% BitChute). Among the YouTube MHMisinfo videos, 55 (65.5%) had low Alignment with Medical Consensus, 40 (47.6%) had inaccurate Information on Interventions, and 11 (13.1%) discouraged the usage of Evidence-based Treatment. For BitChute, the corresponding numbers were: 35 videos (35%) had low Alignment with Medical Consensus, 15 (15%) had inaccurate Information on Interventions, and 22 (22%) discouraged the usage of Evidence-based Treatment. There were 7792 comments associated with labeled YouTube MHMisinfo videos (233 for BitChute videos) and 126555 comments associated with labeled YouTube non-MHMisinfo videos (792 for BitChute videos).

## Dataset Processing

To prepare the labeled video dataset for subsequent experiments, we extracted the audio transcript of all videos using OpenAI's Whisper automatic speech recognition (ASR) tool 3 . The tool has a reported 4% word error rate on FLEURS, a popular ASR benchmark, and has been utilized in previous research for ASR on video data. We also extracted the video's on-screen text content using Google's Video Intelligence API 4 . This text content will be referred to as the visual transcript moving forward.

## Detection of Mental Health Misinformation Methods

To enable studying engagement to mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) at scale, we create machine learning models to detect MHMisinfo videos trained using our MentalMisinfo dataset.

Problem Formulation We formulate the MHMisinfo video detection problem in this paper as a binary classification problem task. Given a video D , it can be classified as either MHMisinfo ( y = 1 , positive class) or non-MHMisinfo ( y = 0 , negative class). A video D is expressed as a triple ( T, A, V ) , where T is the title of the video, A is the audio transcript of the video, and V is the visual transcript of the video (i.e. the on-screen text aggregated across all video frames). While we acknowledge that other features can be extracted from video data, such as vocalic and visual features, we do not include them to simplify prompting for LLM-based classification. We aim to create a classifier F : F ( T ; A ; V ) -→ y , where y ∈ { 0 , 1 } is the ground-truth label of a video. We apply three different learning paradigms for learning this classifier F : gradient descent-based learning, anomaly detection, and in-context learning.

In-context Learning In-context learning (ICL) is a transfer learning strategy that does not update the weights of the pre-trained LLM, unlike gradient learning strategies (Brown et al. 2020). ICL adapts a model to a task by conditioning it on a sequence of demonstrative 'examples'. A demonstration typically refers to a pair ( x, y ) , where x is the input and y is the ground-truth label, which is then rendered using a natural language template. ICL thus feeds the model a prompt containing a sequence of such demonstrations, followed by the test input (also rendered in the template) (Min et al. 2022). The language model is then expected to predict the label of this final data point by generating the most likely sequence of tokens following the input prompt. In-context learning has been shown to perform well in diverse tasks where labeled data is rare or difficult to gather and allows for flexibly incorporating human knowledge into large language models (LLMs) through updating the demonstrations and the prompt template (Min et al. 2022).

3 https://github.com/openai/whisper

4 https://cloud.google.com/video-intelligence/docs

We apply ICL to detect MHMisinfo, using the following as base LLMs for comparative purposes. We choose these models due to their widespread usage and performance in LLM benchmarks, and for one model ( MentalLLaMa ), purported expertise in mental health analysis tasks (Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023).

## LLMs used:

Flan-T5. Flan-T5 is a family of LLMs introduced in (Chung et al. 2022). For our experiment, we use the XL variant of Flan-T5 , which contains about 3 billion parameters.

LLaMa. LLaMa is a family of LLMs introduced in (Touvron et al. 2023). For our experiment, we use the 7B and 13B variants of LLaMa-2

MentalLLaMa. MentalLLaMa , introduced by Yang et al. (2023), is the first open-source LLM specifically built for mental health analysis tasks (Yang et al. 2023). For our experiment, we use the 7B and 13B variants of MentaLLaMa .

Mistral. Mistral is a state-of-the-art open-source LLM by (Jiang et al. 2023). We use the Mistral-v0.1 variant, which contains about 7 billion parameters.

Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT). Generative Pre-trained Transformer ( GPT ) is a family of large language models released by OpenAI (Brown et al. 2020). For our experiment, we utilize the gpt-3.5-turbo (henceforth referred to as GPT3.5 ) and gpt-4-0613 models (henceforth referred to as GPT4 ) models.

We train all of these models using 5-shot ICL, i.e. 5 demonstrations are used to adapt the models to the task. We select the 5-shot setting, as it is the most commonly-used setting in previous few-shot learning experiments (Parnami and Lee 2022). We use the same 5 shots, 3 MHMisinfo, and 2 non-MHMisinfo, to train all LLM-based models. The shots are randomly selected from expert-labeled YouTube and Bitchute videos as described in the previous section. The trained models are then evaluated on the remaining unlabeled data points. For all models using ICL, we design the input prompt template given in Table A7.

We compare the effectiveness of 5-shot ICL-trained models to zero-shot trained models where a prompting strategy to generate the prediction is also used. Unlike 5-shot learning, no demonstrations are given to the model in the zeroshot setting. We also use RoBERTa and MentalRoBERTa as gradient learning baselines (Liu et al. 2019; Ji et al. 2022). We chose these models due to their usage in previous digital mental health studies (Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022).

Table 3: Performance of models in detecting video-based MHMisinfo content. Bold text represents the best performance for the metric among open-source LLMs (that is, excluding the GPT models). Bold and italic text represent the best performance across all models. Bitchute-related metrics are presented with round brackets

| Model                             | Param                             | F1- Macro                         | F1- Pos                           | Prec                              | Rec                               |
|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Zero-shot                         | Zero-shot                         | Zero-shot                         | Zero-shot                         | Zero-shot                         | Zero-shot                         |
| Flan-T5                           | 3B                                | 0.605 (0.493)                     | 0.301 (0.24)                      | 0.623 (0.54)                      | 0.594 (0.521)                     |
| Mistral-0.1                       | 7B                                | 0.390 (0.452)                     | 0.196 (0.386)                     | 0.489 (0.465)                     | 0.470                             |
| LLaMa-13B                         | 13B                               | 0.436 (0.39)                      | 0.089 (0)                         | 0.457 (0.32)                      | (0.463) 0.429 (0.5)               |
| MentaLLaMa-13B                    | 13B                               | 0.546 (0.566)                     | 0.505 (0.527)                     | 0.565 (0.585)                     | 0.569 (0.591)                     |
| GPT3.5                            | 175B                              | 0.514 (0.427)                     | 0.287 (0.095)                     | 0.550 (0.486)                     | 0.604 (0.496)                     |
| GPT4                              | 8 x 220B                          | 0.707 (0.669)                     | 0.517 (0.609)                     | 0.681 (0.669)                     | 0.771 (0.683)                     |
| Few-shot with In-context Learning | Few-shot with In-context Learning | Few-shot with In-context Learning | Few-shot with In-context Learning | Few-shot with In-context Learning | Few-shot with In-context Learning |
| Flan-T5                           | 3B                                | 0.614 (0.531)                     | 0.322 (0.339)                     | 0.624 (0.548)                     | 0.607 (0.537                      |
| Mistral-0.1                       | 7B                                | 0.626                             | 0.364 (0.493)                     | 0.615                             | 0.642 (0.611)                     |
| LLaMa-7B                          | 7B                                | (0.613) 0.561 (0.469)             | 0.217 (0.15)                      | (0.616) 0.58 (0.703)              | 0.554 (0.534)                     |
| MentalLLaMa-7B                    | 7B                                | 0.603 (0.583)                     | 0.328 (0.5)                       | 0.594 (0.584)                     | 0.619 (0.590)                     |
| LLaMa-13B                         | 13B                               | 0.476 (0.555)                     | 0.023 (0.511)                     | 0.684 (0.572)                     | 0.505 (0.577)                     |
| MentaLLaMa-13B                    | 13B                               | 0.595 (0.546)                     | 0.373 (0.5054)                    | 0.597 (0.565)                     | 0.685 (0.569)                     |
| GPT3.5                            | 175B                              | 0.607 (0.626)                     | 0.361 (0.533)                     | 0.597 (0.625) (0.629)             | 0.656                             |
| GPT4                              | 8 x 220B                          | 0.761 (0.674)                     | 0.590 (0.583)                     | 0.745 (0.674)                     | 0.781 (0.674)                     |
| Gradient-based Learning           | Gradient-based Learning           | Gradient-based Learning           | Gradient-based Learning           | Gradient-based Learning           | Gradient-based Learning           |
| RoBERTa                           | 380M                              | 0.464 (0.7916)                    | 0.000 (0.75)                      | 0.433 (0.787)                     | 0.500 (0.813)                     |
| MentalRoBERTa                     | 110M                              | 0.566 (0.6)                       | 0.200 (0.4)                       | 0.773 (0.686)                     | 0.554 (0.604)                     |
| Anomaly Detection                 | Anomaly Detection                 | Anomaly Detection                 | Anomaly Detection                 | Anomaly Detection                 | Anomaly Detection                 |
| ECOD                              | N/A                               | 0.490 (0.64285)                   | 0.08 (0.686)                      | 0.496 (0.5)                       | 0.498 (0.666)                     |

Finally, given the class imbalance between MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos, we also tested the effectiveness of anomaly detection baselines in detecting MHMisinfo videos with the state-of-the-art ECOD algorithm, which has been shown to significantly outperform traditional anomaly detection methods such as one-class SVM in a variety of tasks (Li et al. 2022). For both gradient learning and anomaly detection baseline models, we train them using a fixed 80-20 train-test split under a stratified regime such that the ratio of non-MHMisinfo to MHMisinfo videos is similar between the splits for both Bitchute and YouTube data. All experiments are carried out on a compute cluster with 5 x Nvidia A100

## Results

We report the results of all classification experiments for both the labeled YouTube and Bitchute datasets in Table 3, where Bitchute results are presented within round brackets and YouTube results without. We found that across the board, few-shot LLMs outperformed their zero-shot learning counterparts by a substantial margin. This ranges from a 1.47% increase in macro-F1 for the Flan-T5 model to a 60.5% increase for the Mistral-0.1 model. For the labeled YouTube videos, we found that most few-shot ICL-trained LLMs also out-performed the best gradientbased baseline ( MentalRoBERTa ), with the best model ( GPT4 ) outperforming it by 0.2 F1-Macro and 0.39 F1Positive. In contrast, for the labeled Bitchute videos, we found that even the best few-shot ICL-trained LLMs do not outperform the best gradient learning baseline ( RoBERTa ), with the best model ( GPT4 ) underperforming it by 0.12 F1-Macro and 0.17 F1-Positive. While the best-performing LLM, that being GPT4 , is also the largest among those tested, it is not always the case that larger models perform better than smaller models in detecting mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo). For instance, Flan-T5 with only around 3 billion parameters outperformed the 175billion-parameter GPT3.5 in detecting YouTube MHMisinfo videos while being both substantially faster and less compute-insensitive. We use the best model for each dataset, GPT4 for YouTube and RoBERTa for Bitchute to label all unlabeled YouTube ( n = 6658 ) and Bitchute ( n = 887 ) videos with at least 1 comment. We will now refer to the dataset containing both human-labeled videos from the MentalMisinfo dataset and the machine-labeled videos here as MentalMisinfo-Large . All results presented in the forthcoming sections are generated using the humanlabeled MentalMisinfo dataset unless stated otherwise. 5

## RQ 1: Linguistic Analysis of Engagement with Mental Health Misinformation

## Engagement Analysis

To understand how engagement to MHMisinfo and nonMHMisinfo videos differ on YouTube and Bitchute, we first analyze relevant video-level metadata that we have previously retrieved. These include the number of comments, the number of likes, the number of views, and the like-toview ratio. We use a statistical t -test for comparisons, utilizing Welch's t -test to account for the imbalance of MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos. For YouTube, we find that while non-MHMisinfo videos receive significantly more views ( p = 0 . 035 ) and comments ( p = 0 . 012 ) than MHMisinfo videos, MHMisinfo videos have a significantly higher like-to-view ratio ( p = 0 . 047 ) while also having no significant difference in like count ( p &gt; 0 . 05 ). We observed that non-MHMisinfo Bitchute videos also received more comments compared to MHMisinfo Bitchute videos ( p &lt; 0 . 005 )

5 Both MentalMisinfo and MentalMisinfo-Large datasets, alongside all code needed to reproduce results from this paper can be found at https://tinyurl.com/yrt7kaut

LIWC NMisinfo(%)Misinfo(%)%Diff q -val d

| Affect                                             | Affect                                             | Affect                                             | Affect                                                                      | Affect                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| affect                                             | 6.3                                                | 6.13                                               | -2.69                                                                       | 0.02                                                                |
| posemo                                             | (6.8) 3.79 (3.0)                                   | (6.0) 3.64 (2.9)                                   | (-11.48) -4.06 (-4.46)                                                      | (0.07) 0.02 (0.016) 0.00                                            |
|                                                    | 2.45                                               | 2.45                                               | 0.00 (-19.44)                                                               | (0.093)                                                             |
| negemo                                             | (3.7)                                              | (2.99)                                             | -50.01 ***                                                                  |                                                                     |
| anxiety                                            | 0.53 (0.28) 0.56                                   | 0.26 (0.08)                                        | (§)0.11 (-69.91)** (§) 68.29 ***                                            | (0.128) (†)-0.14                                                    |
| sadness 0.94 (0.43) (0.67) (56.07) (-0.062) Social | sadness 0.94 (0.43) (0.67) (56.07) (-0.062) Social | sadness 0.94 (0.43) (0.67) (56.07) (-0.062) Social | sadness 0.94 (0.43) (0.67) (56.07) (-0.062) Social                          | sadness 0.94 (0.43) (0.67) (56.07) (-0.062) Social                  |
| social family                                      | 8.39 (7.6) 0.82                                    | 9.15 (6.9) 0.60 (0.34)                             | 9.16 (-9.51) -27.24 (17.42) 21.43                                           | *** (†)-0.07 (0.08) *** (§)0.06 (-0.028) (†) -0.03                  |
| friend                                             | (0.28) 0.26 (0.24)                                 | 0.32 (0.22) 0.29                                   | * (-8.541)                                                                  |                                                                     |
| female                                             | 1.28 (0.9) 0.87                                    | (0.3)                                              | -77.78 *** (-60.58)** 137.13 ***                                            | (0.013) (§)0.23 (§) (0.172)                                         |
| male                                               | (1.06)                                             | 2.06                                               |                                                                             | (†)-0.32                                                            |
| bio                                                | 3.06 (2.56) 0.62 (0.9)                             | (0.67) Somatic                                     | (-37.29)* (§)                                                               | (0.113)                                                             |
| body                                               | 1.68 (0.86)                                        | 2.61 (2.39) 0.69 (0.6)                             | -14.61 *** (-6.92) 11.36 (-34.35) -18.11                                    | (§)0.07 (0.028) -0.03 (0.1) *** (§)0.06                             |
| health                                             | 0.11 (0.56)                                        | 1.38 (1.36) 0.17                                   | (58.23) * 53.05 ** (-69.93)*                                                | (†) (-0.12) (†) -0.04 (0.02)                                        |
| sexual                                             | 0.45                                               |                                                    | -18.20                                                                      | (§)0.03                                                             |
|                                                    |                                                    | (0.17) 0.37                                        |                                                                             | (§) (0.034)                                                         |
| ingest                                             | (0.33)                                             | (0.27)                                             |                                                                             | ***                                                                 |
| drives                                             | 4.50 (4.9) 1.39 (0.9) 0.68                         | Drives 6.33 (4.7) 1.52 (1.0)                       | (-17.58) 40.79 *** (-2.69) 9.00 *                                           | (†)-0.25 (0.02) (†) -0.03 (-0.026) *** (†)-0.18 (0.02) *** (†)-0.27 |
| affl. achieve power                                | (0.86) 1.33                                        | 1.17 (0.85) 2.41                                   | (8.38) 71.00 (-2.82) 82.09                                                  |                                                                     |
| reward risk                                        | (2.1) 1.06 (1.11) 0.44                             | (1.6) 1.12 (1.10)                                  | (-22.23) 4.91 (-4.33)                                                       | (0.105) -0.02                                                       |
|                                                    | (0.39) 0.69                                        | 0.76 (0.56) Personal 0.99                          | 72.66 *** (40.01) Concerns 43.08                                            | (0.0133) (†)-0.15 (-0.098) ***(†) -0.11                             |
| work                                               | (1.6) 0.72 (0.9) 0.22 (0.27) 0.16                  | (1.78) 1.24 (1.2) 0.12 (0.26) 0.23 (0.19)          | (11.81) 72.09 *** (40.89) -46.38 (-2.39) 46.22 (-41.63) 300.98 (8.29) 57.20 | (-0.048) (†)-0.16 (-0.123) *** (§)0.07 (0.0037) *** (†)-0.05        |
| leisure home                                       | (0.33) 0.38                                        |                                                    |                                                                             | (0.097)                                                             |
| money                                              | (0.4)                                              | 1.52 (0.43)                                        | ***                                                                         | -0.31 (-0.015)                                                      |
| religion                                           | 0.10                                               |                                                    |                                                                             |                                                                     |
|                                                    |                                                    | 0.16                                               | ***                                                                         |                                                                     |
|                                                    |                                                    |                                                    |                                                                             | (-0.126)                                                            |
|                                                    |                                                    |                                                    |                                                                             | (†)-0.06                                                            |
| death                                              |                                                    |                                                    |                                                                             |                                                                     |
|                                                    |                                                    |                                                    | (72.61)                                                                     |                                                                     |
|                                                    |                                                    | (0.48)                                             |                                                                             |                                                                     |
|                                                    | (0.28)                                             |                                                    |                                                                             |                                                                     |

Table 4: Relevant LIWC categories in the comments, along with results of Student's t -tests. Rows with section marks (§) following the q-value indicate that usage among nonMHMisinfo (NMisinfo) comments is significantly higher. Rows with daggers (†) following q-value indicate that usage among MHMisinfo (Misinfo) comments is significantly higher. Bitchute-related metrics are presented with round brackets. * indicates q &lt; 0 . 05 , ** indicates q &lt; 0 . 01 , *** indicates q &lt; 0 . 001

## Linguistic Analysis

Methods To understand who engages with MHMisinfo videos on mental health and why, we use the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) analysis program (Boyd et al. 2022). LIWC is well-validated for analyzing social media data, especially in mental health contexts (De Choudhury and De 2014; Pendse, Kumar, and De Choudhury 2023). Our analysis focuses on LIWC categories related to perceptions about mental health conditions, including language about affect, community, the body, religion, class, and gender. We remove all stopwords using the Natural Language Toolkit stopword list and normalize all counts by the length of the comment. We use Welch's t -test to measure significant differences in lexicon usage across these relevant categories per platform, with False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjustment at a significance level of 0.05, denoted as the q -value. In Table 4, we present the average percentage of a comment containing language for each LIWC category for both MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo comments on both platforms, the percentage difference in usage within MHMisinfo comments compared to non-MHMisinfo comments, and the corresponding q -values and Cohen's d .

In addition to LIWC, we use an unsupervised language modeling technique called the Sparse Additive Generative Model (SAGE) introduced by Eisenstein et al. (2011) (Eisenstein, Ahmed, and Xing 2011). We employ SAGE to identify discriminating n -grams ( n = 1 , 2 , 3 ) between comments on MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos. The magnitude of the SAGE value of a linguistic token indicates the degree of its uniqueness to the distribution of comments on MHMisinfo videos relative to the distribution of comments on non-MHMisinfo videos. For each word, a positive SAGE value greater than 0 suggests that the n -gram is more representative of comments on MHMisinfo videos, while a negative SAGE value suggests greater representativeness for comments on non-MHMisinfo videos. We initialize the SAGE model using the 500 most frequent words (excluding stopwords and words shorter than 3 characters) for both MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo comments, with a baseline smoothing of 1. Table 5 presents the top n -grams for both MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo comments on both platforms.

## Results

YouTube As we present in Table 4, we find that commenters to MHMisinfo videos are less likely to use some types of somatic language compared to commenters to nonMHMisinfo comments, with language related to health ( q &lt; 0 . 001 ) being used more in response to non-MHMisinfo videos. This may imply that commenters to non-MHMisinfo videos are more likely to be aware of and concerned about the effect of mental disorders on one's overall health:

It's physically and emotionally painful . I feel so bad (bolded words are in LIWC's health category)

In contrast, language related to risk ( q &lt; 0 . 001 ) and death ( q &lt; 0 . 001 ) are significantly more used in MHMisinfo comments. This is likely connected to the tendency professed by many of these comments to frame the impact of mental health conditions with one's mortality:

Table 5: Top-25 most discriminative n-grams for MHMisinfo (Misinfo) comments and non-MHMisinfo (NMisinfo) comments for YouTube and Bitchute, identified through the SAGE algorithm

| Platform   | Misinfo              |             | NMisinfo           |                               |
|------------|----------------------|-------------|--------------------|-------------------------------|
|            | n -gram              | SAGE        | n -gram            | SAGE                          |
|            | schizophrenia        | 2.373       | alice              | -3.951                        |
|            | jesus pray           | 2.323 2.196 | relatable birthday | -3.768 -3.767                 |
|            | step                 | 2.132       | stim               | -3.744                        |
|            | lord                 | 1.943       | adorable           | -3.495                        |
|            | christ               | 1.828       | julian             | -3.292                        |
|            | depression           | 1.653       | mama               | -3.272                        |
|            | holy                 | 1.641       | princess           | -3.249                        |
|            | amen                 | 1.614       | relate             | -3.192                        |
|            | free                 | 1.447       | sweet              | -3.167                        |
|            | medication           |             |                    |                               |
| YouTube    | depressed            | 1.423       | ariel              | -3.144                        |
|            |                      | 1.422       | functioning        | -2.678                        |
|            | meds                 | 1.402       | adhd               | -2.506                        |
|            | truth                | 1.313       | baby               | -2.418                        |
|            | cure                 | 1.283       | hair               | -2.339                        |
|            | name                 | 1.195       | mens               | -2.308                        |
|            | working              | 1.191       | wall               | -2.239                        |
|            | believe              | 1.088       | precious           | -2.144                        |
|            | word                 | 1.065       | accurate           | -2.051                        |
|            | real                 | 0.993       | cute               | -2.048                        |
|            | father               | 0.985       | awareness          | -1.854                        |
|            | drugs                | 0.961       | asian              | -1.853                        |
|            | trans                | 0.959       | cleaning           | -1.819                        |
|            | agree                | 0.952       | teacher            | -1.779                        |
|            | stop                 | 0.943 0.953 | tired mental       | -1.764 0.375                  |
|            | adhd                 | 0.869       | ni***rs            | 0.260 0.246                   |
|            | nicotine             | 0.869       | looks              |                               |
|            | aluminum generations | 0.847       | health             | 0.240                         |
|            | sources              | 0.816       | whites             | 0.225                         |
|            | pfizer               | 0.816       | women              | 0.203                         |
|            | doctor chief         | 0.8 0.775   | jews right like    | 0.189 0.007 0.0002            |
|            | treatment debates    | 0.775 0.769 | thats              | 0.0001                        |
|            |                      |             | white              | 0.0001                        |
| Bitchute   | nuremburg            | 0.744       |                    |                               |
|            | doctors              | 0.744       | need               | 0.0001                        |
|            | news                 | 0.707 0.703 | even look          | 0.0001 9 . 22 ∗ 10 - 5        |
|            | 1986                 | 0.673       | stop               | . - 5                         |
|            | parents              |             |                    | 9 01 ∗ 10                     |
|            | religious            | 0.642       | someone            | 8 . 81 ∗ 10 - 5               |
|            | medical              | 0.642       | well               | 8 . 49 ∗ 10 - 5               |
|            | effective cult       | 0.642       | race               | 8 . 19 ∗ 10 - 5 . 66 ∗ 10 - 5 |
|            |                      | 0.627       | b***h              | 7 - 5                         |
|            | autism               | 0.585       | thing              | 7 . 54 ∗ 10 7 . 54 ∗ 10 - 5   |
|            | true generation      | 0.579 0.563 | real guilt         | 7 . 46 ∗ 10 - 5 - 5           |
|            | diagnosed            | 0.563       | blacks             | 7 . 46 ∗ 10                   |
|            | believe              | 0.549       | shes               | 7 . 46 ∗ 10 - 5               |
|            | childhood            | 0.534       | yeah               | 7 . 32 ∗ 10 - 5               |

'Yeah, they had depression, but if they showed it they were useless to others, so they were left to die . (the bolded word is in LIWC's body category)

Self-perceptions about one's gender and ambitions also play a key role in how people react to MHMisinfo videos. We find significantly higher usages of male words within MHMisinfo comments ( q &lt; 0 . 001 ), whereas non-MHMisinfo comments have significantly higher usages of female-referent words. Commenters to MHMisinfo videos also utilize more words related to power and achievement such as 'defeat' or 'strength'. This seems to suggest the people consuming and responding to MHMisinfo videos are more likely to be male and more likely to believe in the analogy that mental disorders are 'enemies' needing to be defeated and that people who suffer from mental disorders are not strong enough to defeat the 'enemy':

Imagine have depression... as wise Andrew Tate said, just a weak mindset. (bolded words are in LIWC's power category)

Finally, we also find that comments to MHMisinfo videos are 4 times more likely to evoke religion language when compared to comments to non-MHMisinfo videos. ( q &lt; 0 . 001 ). This is further corroborated by the most distinguishing words deployed by the former identified by SAGE, with 6 of the top ten SAGE keywords being religion-related: 'jesus', 'pray', 'lord', 'christ', 'holy', and 'amen'. Both evidence point to a substantial portion of users who engage with mental health misinformation having a faith-centered understanding of mental ailments and treatments and are more likely to distrust evidence-based therapies:

Got put on medication that did nothing. . . . Got into the Word, prayer , worship and acts of service-it all fled. Hallelujah

It's hard, but turning to Christ will always be the way out (bolded words are in LIWC's religion category)

We found that MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo comments follow similar LIWC and SAGE score patterns even when accounting for machine-labeled videos and comments in the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset. Such results are shown in tables A3 and A6 of the Appendix section.

Bitchute However, there are few significant differences between MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo Bitchute comments. This could be partly attributed to Bitchute's alt-tech nature, which attracts users with more homogeneous viewpoints regarding mental health compared to YouTube. Although some LIWC features differ between these sets of comments, some differences are opposite in direction from their corresponding sets on YouTube. For instance, comments responding to MHMisinfo videos on Bitchute show significantly higher usage of language related to health and lower usage of language related to masculinity and sexuality. An inspection of labeled Bitchute videos reveals that much of these differences are driven by the prevalence of anti-transgender content within videos labeled as nonMHMisinfo. Despite substantial differences in user demographics and mental health content posted on these platforms, there are still similarities in linguistic patterns of comments on MHMisinfo videos. Notably, treatment-related (e.g., medication for YouTube, treatment for Bitchute) and religion-related (e.g., christ for YouTube, religious for Bitchute) SAGE n-grams persist across both platforms.

## RQ 2: Assessing Agreement to Mental Health Misinformation

We model the agreement detection task as follows: Given a video's full transcript (which is created by combining the video's title, and audio transcript with its on-screen text content i.e. visual transcript and special delimiting characters surrounding each of the transcripts), and the full text of the comment, we intend to determine whether the comment 'agrees' or 'does not agree' with the video. Here, 'does not agree' can either indicate disagreement, neutrality, or that the comment is irrelevant to the video (i.e. spam).

To measure this, similar to RQ2, we built a Large Language Model (LLM)-based agreement classifier using a fewshot in-context learning approach. We randomly sample comments from the labeled dataset and label them for agreement, until we get a sample of 3 comments agreeing to the video and 2 comments not agreeing to the video. Given the non-specialized nature of the task unlike other tasks in this paper which involve specialized knowledge regarding mental health, we use the Mistral model as our base LLM. We feed Mistral 5 examples and their agreement label, followed by the target comment and its associated video. Then we ask it to generate the agreement label for such video-comment pair. To verify the validity of the classifier for large-scale labeling, the first author and the supervising co-author randomly labeled 100 video-comment pairs for ground truth agreement. We compare the machine-generated agreement labels with the ground truth agreement, which yields a high F1 score of 0.86.

We statistically compare the distribution of 'agree' to 'does not agree' comments within responses to MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos using the χ 2 test. For YouTube, we found that comments in response to MHMisinfo videos are significantly less likely to agree with their content ( % agreement = 5.77%) than those in response to non-MHMisinfo videos ( % agreement = 20.14%) ( p &lt; 0 . 001 ). The trend holds even when we do the comparison on the YouTube videos in the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset ( p &lt; 0 . 001 ). In contrast, we found the opposite trend for comments in response to Bitchute MHMisinfo videos, where there is significantly higher levels of video-comment concordance there ( % agreement = 15.5%) compared to non-MHMisinfo videos ( % agreement = 6.2%). These agreement trends hold even if we tested on the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset. We present results regarding video-comment agreement for both YouTube and Bitchute in Table 6 for the MentalMisinfo dataset and Table A2 of the Appendix section for the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset.

## RQ 3: Assessing Stigma in Responses to Mental Health Misinformation

Finally, we are interested in whether comments in response to mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) videos are Table 6: Results summary for RQs 2 (Agreement Analysis) and 3 (Stigma Analysis) on YouTube and Bitchute comments. Here, * indicates p &lt; 0 . 05 , ** indicates p &lt; 0 . 01 , *** indicates p &lt; 0 . 001

| Platform   | Metric    | % Misinfo   | % NMisinfo   | p-value   | χ 2          |
|------------|-----------|-------------|--------------|-----------|--------------|
| YouTube    | Agreement | 5.8 %       | 20.1 %       | ***       | 4 . 8 ∗ 10 4 |
|            | Stigma    | 32.9 %      | 21.9 %       | ***       | 6948.37      |
| Bitchute   | Agreement | 15.5 %      | 6.2 %        | ***       | 572.32       |
|            | Stigma    | 53.4 %      | 49.3 %       | *         | 5.2          |

more stigmatizing when compared to responses to nonMHMisinfo videos. Previous evidence from literature has pointed to a dangerous potential feedback loop between mental health stigma and misinformation related to various mental health disorders (Corrigan 2004). If left uncontrolled, this feedback loop can cause serious harm to people's mental well-being and degrade trust in the medical system. Therefore, it is important to verify whether evidence of heightened levels of stigma linked to mental health misinformation can be found on consequential video-sharing platforms.

We frame the stigmatizing comment detection tasks as a binary detection task. Given a comment c = { w 1 , w 2 , ..., w n } containing w i words, we trained a classifier F that learns the function F ( c ) -→ y ∈ { 0 , 1 } , where y is the stigma label of the comment (0 for no stigma, 1 for stigma). Similar to previous classification approaches presented in this paper, we utilize 5-shot ICL to train this classifier F . To generate the data used for few-shot ICL training, we randomly sample comments from MentalMisinfo fo Due to the specific and complex nature of mental health stigma and its linguistic manifestations, we use the specialized MentaLLaMa-13B model as our base LLM (Yang et al. 2023). We used the prompt template given in Table A8 as the input.

Similar to the agreement classifier, we verify the performance of the classifier by randomly labeling 100 comments manually for ground truth, drawing on existing stigma literatures (Mittal and De Choudhury 2023). Our approach yields a satisfactory F1 score of 0.875. Similar to the agreement analysis, we statistically compare the distribution of stigmatizing to non-stigmatizing comments within responses to MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos using the χ 2 test, We found for both Bitchute and YouTube, comments in response to MHMisinfo videos contain significantly more stigmatizing views against mental health compared to those of non-MHMisinfo videos. The gap in stigma presence within MHMisinfo comments and nonMHMisinfo comments is greater between YouTube comments (32.92% vs. 21.9%) compared to Bitchute comments (53.4% vs. 49.35%), most likely due to Bitchute commenters being more likely to hold stigmatizing views regarding mental health whether they are exposed to MHMisinfo content or not. As is the case with our agreement analysis in RQ2, the trends hold even when we repeated the experiment on the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset. We present results regarding stigma-holding comments for both YouTube and Bitchute in Table 6 for the MentalMisinfo dataset and Table A2 of the Appendix section for the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset.

## Discussion

## Implications for Misinformation Research

Our research provides an empirical understanding of user engagement with short-form mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) on video-sharing platforms, focusing on automated detection techniques. We introduce the fi rst dataset and framework for classifying online mental health (MH) misinformation. Leveraging the task generalization capabilities of LLMs, we demonstrate their superiority over gradient-based learning approaches, especially in few-shot in-context learning. Consistent with recent work by Ziems et al. (2023), our study shows that models like GPT-4 and Mistral-0.1 significantly outperform baseline models in detecting MHMisinfo on YouTube. However, while fewshot approaches underperform compared to baselines in detecting Bitchute MHMisinfo, they still offer robust identification of a wide variety of MHMisinfo across different platforms with very few labeled examples, allowing for natural language explanations of the classifier's decisions. This suggests new possibilities for addressing online misinformation challenges with advances in generative AI.

Unlike prior research, our study goes beyond demonstrating that AI techniques can detect online misinformation, exploring how this misinformed content is perceived in the broader social media ecosystem. Analysis of our unique MHMisinfo dataset reveals significant linguistic disparities in reactions to MHMisinfo versus non-MHMisinfo content. On YouTube, our quantitative analysis of comments indicates that audiences responding to MHMisinfo videos are more likely to be male, religious, and inclined to distrust evidence-based approaches to mental health care. This aligns with previous research on susceptibility to online health misinformation (Nan et al., 2022). Using an LLMbased approach, we observe lower agreement rates with MHMisinfo content compared to non-MHMisinfo content, although the presence of any agreement is alarming. Even more concerning are our observations on Bitchute comments, where there is substantially higher agreement with MHMisinfo videos compared to non-MHMisinfo videos. Such rates of agreement likely reflect the site's population, which is more prone to conspiratorial thinking. Additionally, MHMisinfo comments on both YouTube and Bitchute show a higher likelihood of perpetuating stigma against individuals with mental health conditions. Our findings highlight the urgent need to not only tackle MHMisinfo content through algorithmic strategies but also to implement approaches to reduce the resulting harm.

We make recommendations for how online platforms can design better pathways to high-quality mental health information. Furthermore, we discuss how public health personnel can effectively utilize online social media platforms to address common mental health misconceptions and disseminate adaptive mental health resources to better meet the needs of those who may lack access to care or be marginalized.

## Platform Design Recommendations

Adaptive Interventions against Mental Health Misinformation Our work quantitatively demonstrates how certain mental health-related topics are susceptible to MHMisinfo content. Additionally, we show that certain individual characteristics, such as male and religious-inclined users, are more likely to be receptive to misinformation within these topics.

To combat the spread of MHMisinfo, platforms can restrict access to such content by demoting it from users' search recommendations or removing it altogether (Van Der Linden 2022). Large language models (LLMs) offer a powerful solution for content moderation efforts due to their general capabilities and adaptability to domain-specific tasks. LLMs can identify MHMisinfo without the need for labor-intensive dataset curation required by gradient-based modeling approaches. However, it's important to acknowledge that these models aren't perfect, and there's a risk of misclassification. To mitigate this risk, platforms can incorporate human moderators into the framework and resort to content removal only in clear-cut cases. They can also implement additional methods to identify suspected MHMisinfo content, such as harnessing community reporting, as utilized by Twitter's erstwhile Community Notes program (Pr¨ ollochs 2022).

Despite efforts to moderate MHMisinfo, it remains challenging to monitor every piece of content, and susceptible users can still seek out, consume, and share MHMisinfo. Therefore, platform-based interventions should focus on empowering susceptible users to combat MHMisinfo and access relevant mental health resources. Promising mechanisms include credibility markers for health professionals (prominently deployed by YouTube) and keyword-triggered verified resource labels for specific mental health conditions (prominently deployed by TikTok). However, these interventions often lack demographic and geographic context, missing the opportunity to provide health information resources more likely to be adopted by susceptible users. For example, users who self-identify as religious could be provided with faith-based mental health resources advocating for the integration of evidence-based and spiritual practices in mental health care. Platforms could also adopt a Community Notes-style system for individual mental health-related videos, inviting members to fact-check or provide additional context.

Pathways from Online Information to Offline Care The counterspeech doctrine, as established by Justice Brandeis in the 1927 landmark case Whitney v. California, expressed the idea that the preferred solution to bad speech in the framework of the First Amendment should be more speech (Richards and Calvert 2000). While the effectiveness of doctrine has been questioned in recent years due to the rapid spread of misinformation and hate speech across social media platforms, high-quality credible information on mental health is still needed to meet the needs of viewers on all stages of their mental health journey (Gowen 2013). Mental health professionals such as psychiatrists or licensed therapists are the most well-positioned to make accurate and evidence-based claims on mental health conditions

(Kutcher, Wei, and Coniglio 2016). However, given their other commitments and the widely acknowledged paucity of trained professionals relative to public health needs (Butryn et al. 2017), platforms should aim to lower the barrier to creating high-quality yet accessible videos for verified mental health experts. Practical solutions for achieving this goal might include providing free video templates, editorial assistance, and algorithmically promoting content produced by mental health professionals.

Our findings also echo previous research on how most popular mental health-related content on social media platforms promote non-nuanced, non-agentive narratives on mental illness over more nuanced and agentive narratives (Milton et al. 2023). The former are much more likely to be MHMisinfo based on our criteria, as it discourages the usage of evidence-based treatment and has low alignment with medical consensus on mental health. Platforms could encourage the latter through algorithmic promotion and platform-creator partnerships in a similar vein to the YouTube Partner Program 6 to incentivize the creation of high-quality patient-centered mental health content.

## Limitations and Future Work

Our quantitative research on mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo), the first of its kind, identifies constraints that pave the way for future development in this critical area. Focused on monolingual content and responses (English) from YouTube and Bitchute, our study urges further exploration of cross-cultural differences in mental health narratives (Pendse, Niederhoffer, and Sharma 2019). A vital avenue also includes understanding MHMisinfo on youth-centric platforms like TikTok and Instagram, given the heightened susceptibility of adolescents (Patel et al. 2007). Future research could pursue such avenue given adequate regulatory permission. Further, our linguistic findings revealed that users engaging with MHMisinfo content are often male and faith-oriented. Due to limitations in inferring demographic information through existing data collection mechanisms, future research could directly recruit participants who utilize video-sharing platforms for their mental health informational needs and conduct population-level analyses with user-contributed engagement data. Controlled experiments with these participants could illuminate attitudes towards MHMisinfo and identify effective interventions for MHMisinfo.

## Conclusion

Mental health resources diffused through online videosharing platforms have the potential to substantially augment traditional mental health services, especially in MPSAs in the United States and around the world. However, mental health misinformation can substantially exacerbate stigma towards individuals afflicted with mental health and harm afflicted individuals through ignorance, or even rejection of effective interventions. Therefore, mental health professionals, researchers, and even online platforms must understand mental health misinformation (MHMisinfo) content and community engagement to such content. With our novel MentalMisinfo dataset, our paper first demonstrates the effectiveness of large language models (LLMs) under few-shot in-context learning in detecting MHMisinfo content. More central to our research focus, we deployed novel LLM-based approaches in conjunction with well-validated linguistic analysis techniques to find many notable trends regarding engagement with MHMisinfo content. More specifically, we found that audiences responding to MHMisinfo videos are more likely to be male, religious, and inclined to distrust evidence-based approaches to mental health care. We also found that MHMisinfo videos generated substantial agreement from commenters, and in the case of Bitchute, significantly more when compared with agreement to non-MHMisinfo videos. Finally, comments in MHMisinfo videos were more highly associated with stigmatizing views. Our findings could inform potential adaptive interventions to counteract misinformation in favor of accurate and timely mental health information. We believe that our first large-scale quantitative analysis of MHMisinfo content on video-sharing platforms will enable future research on assessing and augmenting the quality of online mental health information.

6 https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/72851

## References

Andrilla, C. H. A.; Patterson, D. G.; Garberson, L. A.; Coulthard, C.; and Larson, E. H. 2018. Geographic variation in the supply of selected behavioral health providers. American journal of preventive medicine , 54(6): S199-S207.

Basch, C. H.; Donelle, L.; Fera, J.; and Jaime, C. 2022. Deconstructing TikTok videos on mental health: cross-sectional, descriptive content analysis. JMIR formative research , 6(5): e38340.

Bizzotto, N.; de Bruijn, G.-J.; and Schulz, P. J. 2023. Buffering against exposure to mental health misinformation in online communities on Facebook: the interplay of depression literacy and expert moderation. BMC Public Health , 23(1): 1577.

Boyd, R. L.; Ashokkumar, A.; Seraj, S.; and Pennebaker, J. W. 2022. The development and psychometric properties of LIWC-22. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin , 1-47.

Brown, T.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J. D.; Dhariwal, P.; Neelakantan, A.; Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 1877-1901.

Butryn, T.; Bryant, L.; Marchionni, C.; and Sholevar, F. 2017. The shortage of psychiatrists and other mental health providers: causes, current state, and potential solutions. International Journal of Academic Medicine , 3(1): 5-9.

Chancellor, S.; and De Choudhury, M. 2020. Methods in predictive techniques for mental health status on social media: a critical review. NPJ digital medicine , 3(1): 43.

Chung, H. W.; Hou, L.; Longpre, S.; Zoph, B.; Tay, Y.; Fedus, W.; Li, Y.; Wang, X.; Dehghani, M.; Brahma, S.; et al. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 .

Corrigan, P. 2004. How stigma interferes with mental health care. American psychologist , 59(7): 614.

De Choudhury, M.; and De, S. 2014. Mental health discourse on reddit: Self-disclosure, social support, and anonymity. In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media , volume 8, 71-80.

Del Arco, F. M. P.; Nozza, D.; and Hovy, D. 2023. Respectful or toxic? using zero-shot learning with language models to detect hate speech. In The 7th Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH) , 60-68.

Eichstaedt, J. C.; Smith, R. J.; Merchant, R. M.; Ungar, L. H.; Crutchley, P.; Preot ¸iuc-Pietro, D.; Asch, D. A.; and Schwartz, H. A. 2018. Facebook language predicts depression in medical records. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(44): 1120311208.

Eisenstein, J.; Ahmed, A.; and Xing, E. P. 2011. Sparse additive generative models of text. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning (ICML-11) , 1041-1048.

Gowen, L. K. 2013. Online mental health information seeking in young adults with mental health challenges. Journal of Technology in Human Services , 31(2): 97-111.

Hanley, T.; Prescott, J.; and Gomez, K. U. 2019. A systematic review exploring how young people use online forums for support around mental health issues. Journal of mental health , 28(5): 566576.

Hussein, E.; Juneja, P.; and Mitra, T. 2020. Measuring misinformation in video search platforms: An audit study on YouTube. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 4(CSCW1): 1-27.

Ji, S.; Zhang, T.; Ansari, L.; Fu, J.; Tiwari, P.; and Cambria, E. 2022. MentalBERT: Publicly Available Pretrained Language Models for Mental Healthcare. In Proceedings of LREC .

Jiang, A. Q.; Sablayrolles, A.; Mensch, A.; Bamford, C.; Chaplot, D. S.; Casas, D. d. l.; Bressand, F.; Lengyel, G.; Lample, G.; Saulnier, L.; et al. 2023. Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 .

Kutcher, S.; Wei, Y.; and Coniglio, C. 2016. Mental health literacy: Past, present, and future. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry , 61(3): 154-158.

Li, Z.; Zhao, Y.; Hu, X.; Botta, N.; Ionescu, C.; and Chen, G. H. 2022. Ecod: Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution functions. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 35(12): 12181-12193.

Liu, Y.; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.; Levy, O.; Lewis, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Stoyanov, V. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .

MentalHealthAmerica. 2023. State of Care 2022.

Milton, A.; Ajmani, L.; DeVito, M. A.; and Chancellor, S. 2023. 'I See Me Here': Mental Health Content, Community, and Algorithmic Curation on TikTok. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1-17.

Min, S.; Lyu, X.; Holtzman, A.; Artetxe, M.; Lewis, M.; Hajishirzi, H.; and Zettlemoyer, L. 2022. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12837 .

Mittal, S.; and De Choudhury, M. 2023. Moral Framing of Mental Health Discourse and Its Relationship to Stigma: A Comparison of Social Media and News. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1-19.

Parnami, A.; and Lee, M. 2022. Learning from few examples: A summary of approaches to few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04291 .

Patel, V.; Flisher, A. J.; Hetrick, S.; and McGorry, P. 2007. Mental health of young people: a global public-health challenge. The lancet , 369(9569): 1302-1313.

Pelrine, K.; Reksoprodjo, M.; Gupta, C.; Christoph, J.; and Rabbany, R. 2023. Towards Reliable Misinformation Mitigation: Generalization, Uncertainty, and GPT-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14928 .

Pendse, S. R.; Kumar, N.; and De Choudhury, M. 2023. Marginalization and the Construction of Mental Illness Narratives Online: Foregrounding Institutions in Technology-Mediated Care. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 7(CSCW2): 1-30.

Pendse, S. R.; Niederhoffer, K.; and Sharma, A. 2019. Crosscultural differences in the use of online mental health support forums. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 3(CSCW): 1-29.

Pr¨ ollochs, N. 2022. Community-based fact-checking on Twitter's Birdwatch platform. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 16, 794-805.

Qin, W.; Chen, Z.; Wang, L.; Lan, Y.; Ren, W.; and Hong, R. 2023. Read, Diagnose and Chat: Towards Explainable and Interactive LLMs-Augmented Depression Detection in Social Media. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05138 .

Richards, R. D.; and Calvert, C. 2000. Counterspeech 2000: A new look at the old remedy for bad speech. BYU L. Rev. , 553.

Shen, H.; Li, T.; Li, T. J.-J.; Park, J. S.; and Yang, D. 2023. Shaping the Emerging Norms of Using Large Language Models in Social Computing Research. In Companion Publication of the 2023 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , 569-571.

Starvaggi, I.; Dierckman, C.; and Lorenzo-Luaces, L. 2023. Mental health misinformation on social media: Review and future directions. Current Opinion in Psychology , 101738.

Suarez-Lledo, V.; and Alvarez-Galvez, J. 2021. Prevalence of health misinformation on social media: systematic review. Journal of medical Internet research , 23(1): e17187.

Touvron, H.; Martin, L.; Stone, K.; Albert, P.; Almahairi, A.; Babaei, Y.; Bashlykov, N.; Batra, S.; Bhargava, P.; Bhosale, S.; et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 .

Trujillo, M.; Gruppi, M.; Buntain, C.; and Horne, B. D. 2020. What is bitchute? characterizing the. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM conference on hypertext and social media , 139-140.

Van Der Linden, S. 2022. Misinformation: susceptibility, spread, and interventions to immunize the public. Nature Medicine , 28(3): 460-467.

van Kampen, K.; Laski, J.; Herman, G.; Chan, T. M.; et al. 2022. Investigating COVID-19 vaccine communication and misinformation on tiktok: Cross-sectional study. Jmir Infodemiology , 2(2): e38316.

Wawrzuta, D.; Jaworski, M.; Gotlib, J.; and Panczyk, M. 2021. Characteristics of antivaccine messages on social media: systematic review. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 23(6): e24564.

Yang, K.; Ji, S.; Zhang, T.; Xie, Q.; Kuang, Z.; and Ananiadou, S. 2023. Towards interpretable mental health analysis with large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 6056-6077.

Zhang, T.; Ladhak, F.; Durmus, E.; Liang, P.; McKeown, K.; and Hashimoto, T. B. 2023. Benchmarking large language models for news summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13848 .

Zhang, Z.; Chen, S.; Wu, M.; and Zhu, K. 2022. Symptom identification for interpretable detection of multiple mental disorders on social media. In Proceedings of the 2022 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , 9970-9985.

## Ethics Checklist

1. For most authors...

- (a) Would answering this research question advance science without violating social contracts, such as violating privacy norms, perpetuating unfair profiling, exacerbating the socioeconomic divide, or implying disrespect to societies or cultures?: Yes. As discussed in the 'Introduction' and 'Discussion' sections, our paper advances the spaces of computational social science and digital mental health as the first to quantitatively examine mental health misinformation on video-sharing platforms. Our findings offer a balanced approach to detecting and moderating mental health misinformation with contextual consideration for freedom of speech rights and potential biases. Our nuanced approach aims to avoid profiling and violation of any relevant social contracts.
- (b) Do your main claims in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper's contributions and scope? Yes. We have carefully reviewed that the claims made in 'Abstract' and 'Introduction' sections have accurately reflect our contributions and project scope
- (c) Doyou clarify how the proposed methodological approach is appropriate for the claims made? Yes (refer to the 'Methods' subsection for RQ1, RQ2, RQ3 sections) We justify the appropriateness of our model and method selection in the Detection of Mental Health Misinformation section by referring to prior works that use them for similar tasks/objectives. For RQ1, we justify our usage of specific LIWC categories and SAGEdue to their usage in previous studies regarding online mental health discourse. In addition, we also quantitatively validate our LLM-based agreement and stigma classifiers in RQ2 and RQ3 by comparing a subset of machine-labeled comments to human-labeled contents
- (d) Do you clarify what are possible artifacts in the data used, given population-specific distributions? Yes, we did specify potential artifacts in the YouTube and Bitchute data used in the 'Datasets' section, such as those brought about by the set of keywords used.
- (e) Did you describe the limitations of your work? Yes, we did discuss the limitations of our work in the 'Limitations and Future Work' subsection within 'Discussion'
- (f) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? Yes, we did discuss the potential negative societal impacts of our work and how to mitigate them in the 'Discussion' section)
- (g) Did you discuss any potential misuse of your work? Yes, we did discuss the potential misuse of our work and how to mitigate them in the 'Discussion' section)
- (h) Did you describe steps taken to prevent or mitigate potential negative outcomes of the research, such as data and model documentation, data anonymization, responsible release, access control, and the reproducibility of findings? Yes, we did discuss the steps taken prevent to mitigate potential negative outcomes of the research, such as data anonymization, responsible release, and reproducibility of findings in the 'Dataset' section.
- (i) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to them? Yes, we have read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that our paper conforms to them to the best of our capabilities
2. Additionally, if your study involves hypotheses testing...
- (a) Did you clearly state the assumptions underlying all theoretical results? NA
- (b) Have you provided justifications for all theoretical results? NA
- (c) Did you discuss competing hypotheses or theories that might challenge or complement your theoretical results? NA
- (d) Have you considered alternative mechanisms or explanations that might account for the same outcomes observed in

your study? NA

- (e) Did you address potential biases or limitations in your theoretical framework? NA
- (f) Have you related your theoretical results to the existing literature in social science? NA
- (g) Did you discuss the implications of your theoretical results for policy, practice, or further research in the social science domain? NA
3. Additionally, if you are including theoretical proofs...
- (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? NA
- (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? NA
4. Additionally, if you ran machine learning experiments...
- (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experimental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? We have included the prompts used in LLM-based classifiers and experiments in the paper (refer to Methods subsection for RQ1, 2, and 3. We also plan to release the curated dataset publicly to enable replicability, pending the publication of this manuscript.
- (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen)? Yes, we did include the prompts used for LLM-based experiments and training details for baselines in the Methods subsection for RQ1, 2, and 3
- (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experiments multiple times)? NA
- (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? Yes, we include the total amount of compute and type of resources used for every LLM-based procedures (refer to the Methods subsection of sections Detection of Mental Health Misinformation , RQ2: Analyzing Agreement with Mental Health Misinformation and RQ3: Analyzing Stigma within Mental Health Misinformation .
- (e) Do you justify how the proposed evaluation is sufficient and appropriate to the claims made? Yes, please refer to subsection 'Methods' of RQ1. We justify the appropriateness of our LIWC and SAGE methods by referring to prior works that use them for similar tasks/objectives. For LLM-based approaches to detecting stigma and agreeement, we quantitatively validate the approaches by comparing machinegenerated labels with human-generated labels (refer to Sections 'Research Question 2 - Methods' and 'Research Question 3 - Methods'). Further, we contextualize our findings on stigma and concurrence in response to health misinformation in the existing online misinformation literature.
- (f) Do you discuss what is 'the cost' of misclassification and fault (in)tolerance? Yes, we discussed the potential 'cost' of misclassification and potential solutions to mitigate classification errors in the 'Platform Design Recommendation' subsection, under 'Targeted Interventions against Mental Health Misinformation'.
5. Additionally, if you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
- (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? Yes, we properly cite the manuscripts introducing the base LLMs we used for RQ1, RQ2 and RQ3
- (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? No, we did not due to space constraints. All open source LLMs are released under Apache 2.0, except for LLaMA which is released under its customized Apache-derived license and MentaLLaMA which is released under MIT license.
- (c) Did you include any new assets in the supplemental material or as a URL? We will be releasing our mental health mis-

information dataset and code used for the experiments in a public URL upon the publication of this manuscript.

- (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you're using/curating? No, we did not due to space constraints. Given that we only collect publicly available data on Bitchute and Youtube, explicit content from people whose data we are curating is not required. We discuss steps to remove personally identifiable information from the dataset below.
- (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable information or offensive content? No, we did not due to space constraints. Given that our collected dataset might contain personally identifiable information or offensive content, we follow best practices by only sharing video URLs and comment IDs in the public dataset. A fully hydrated dataset is available upon request, and evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
- (f) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you discuss how you intend to make your datasets FAIR? No, we did not due to space constraints. We will be releasing our dataset on a publicly-facing Github repository (F, A) in .csv format (I). The dataset will be released under the Apache 2.0 license (R).
- (g) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you create a Datasheet for the Dataset? Yes, we did. We will be releasing the Datasheet upon publication of this manuscript
6. Additionally, if you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
- (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots? NA
- (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with mentions of Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals? NA
- (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount spent on participant compensation? NA
- (d) Did you discuss how data is stored, shared, and deidentified? NA

## Appendix

| Platform   | Category # Comments   |   # Commenters |   Av. Length |
|------------|-----------------------|----------------|--------------|
| YouTube    | NMisinfo 485738       |         283437 |        102.9 |
|            | Misinfo 84109         |          46694 |         97.6 |
| Bitchute   | NMisinfo 12747        |           4226 |          177 |
|            | Misinfo 938           |            623 |          291 |

Table A1: Summary statistics for the comments associated with the labeled MHMisinfo and non-MHMisinfo videos for the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset

Table A2: Results summary for RQs 2 (Agreement Analysis) and 3 (Stigma Analysis) on YouTube and Bitchute comments for the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset

| Platform Metric    | %Misinfo %NMisinfo p-value   | %Misinfo %NMisinfo p-value   | %Misinfo %NMisinfo p-value   | χ 2      |
|--------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|----------|
| YouTube Agreement  | 11.05%                       | 15.54%                       | ***                          | 3 ∗ 10 4 |
| Stigma             | 35.62%                       | 22.49%                       | ***                          | 30057.51 |
| Bitchute Agreement | 19.7%                        | 11.2%                        | ***                          | 843.16   |
| Stigma             | 49.8%                        | 41.2%                        | **                           | 142.66   |

Table A3: Relevant LIWC categories in the comments, along with results of Student's t -tests for the MentalMisinfo-Large . Rows with section marks (§) following q-value indicates that usage among nonMHMisinfo (NMisinfo) comment is significantly higher. Rows with daggers (†) following q-value indicates that usage among MHMisinfo (Misinfo) comment is significantly higher. Bitchute-related metrics are presented with round brackets. * indicates q &lt; 0 . 05 , ** indicates q &lt; 0 . 01 , *** indicates q &lt; 0 . 001

| LIWC              | NMisinfo (%) Misinfo (%) %Diff q -val d   | NMisinfo (%) Misinfo (%) %Diff q -val d   | NMisinfo (%) Misinfo (%) %Diff q -val d   | NMisinfo (%) Misinfo (%) %Diff q -val d   | NMisinfo (%) Misinfo (%) %Diff q -val d   |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Affect            | 7.17                                      | Affect 6.62                               | -7.72                                     | *** (§)                                   | 0.053                                     |
| Pos Emo           | (6.5) 4.62                                | (6.2) 4.07                                | (-4.68) -11.87                            | *** (§)                                   | (0.029) 0.059                             |
|                   | (2.87)                                    | (2.63) 2.51                               | (-8.34) 0.26                              |                                           | (0.031) -0.001                            |
| Neg Emo           | 2.51 (3.63)                               | (3.53)                                    | (-2.56)                                   |                                           | (0.012)                                   |
| Anxiety           | 0.49 (0.22)                               | 0.26 (0.23)                               | -46.76 (2.24)                             | *** (§)                                   | 0.102 (-0.003)                            |
| Sadness           | 0.65                                      | 0.49                                      | -24.87                                    | *** (§)                                   | 0.055                                     |
|                   | (0.37)                                    | (0.32)                                    | (-13.83)                                  |                                           | (0.02)                                    |
| Social            | Social                                    | Social                                    | Social                                    | Social                                    | Social                                    |
| social            | 9.44                                      | 10.83                                     | 14.81                                     | *** (§)                                   | -0.123                                    |
| family friend     | (7.76) 0.98 (0.34)                        | (6.93) 1.2 (0.25) 0.46 (0.19)             | (-10.75) 24.89 (-28.13)                   | ** (§) *** (†) * (§)                      | (0.09) -0.057                             |
|                   | 0.37 (0.27) 1.38 (0.98)                   | 0.4 (0.53)                                | 25.41 (-30.07) -66.79 ( 236.99 (-37.44)   | *** (†) *** (§)                           | (0.044) -0.038 (0.044) 0.214 (0.126)      |
| female            | 1.1                                       | 3.7                                       |                                           | *** (§)                                   |                                           |
|                   | (1.07)                                    | (0.67)                                    | -45.90)                                   | *** (†)                                   |                                           |
| male              |                                           |                                           |                                           |                                           | -0.546                                    |
|                   |                                           |                                           |                                           | *** (§)                                   | (0.114)                                   |
| bio               | 2.68                                      | Somatic 3.34                              | 24.77                                     | *** (†)                                   | -0.106                                    |
|                   | (2.65) 0.6                                | (3.30) 0.8                                | (24.33)                                   | ** (§)                                    | (-0.1)                                    |
| body              | (1.06) 1.13                               | (0.72) 1.08                               | 31.72 (-32.07) -3.90                      | *** (†) *** (§)                           | -0.03 (0.092)                             |
| health            | (0.7)                                     | (1.56)                                    | (122.92) 40.00                            | ** (§) *** (†)                            | 0.0117 (-0.269) -0.03                     |
| sexual            | 0.11 (0.78)                               | 0.16 (0.69)                               | (-11.69)                                  | *** (†)                                   | (0.025)                                   |
| ingest            | 0.53 (0.33)                               | 1.06 (0.35)                               | 98.35 (6.83)                              | *** (†)                                   | -0.157 (†) (-0.011)                       |
| Drives            | Drives                                    | Drives                                    | Drives                                    | Drives                                    | Drives                                    |
| drives            | 5.11                                      | 5.99                                      | 17.18                                     | *** (†)                                   | -0.104                                    |
| affiliation       | (4.87) 1.76                               | (5.18) 2.09                               | (6.46)                                    | *** (†)                                   | (-0.04) -0.063                            |
| achieve           | (1.0) 0.82 (0.72) 1.42                    | (0.96) 0.85 (0.63) 1.84                   | 19.14 (-4.54) 2.64 (-11.8) 29.21          |                                           | (0.014) -0.006 (0.032) -0.097             |
| power reward      | (2.19) 1.15                               | (2.25) 1.27                               | (2.64) 10.72                              | *** (†) *** (†)                           | (-0.011) -0.033 (-0.051)                  |
|                   | (0.91) 0.44                               | (1.06) 0.46                               | (16.21) 4.824 (23.6)                      | * (†)                                     | -0.0099 (-0.053)                          |
| risk              | (0.49)                                    | (0.60)                                    |                                           |                                           |                                           |
| Personal Concerns | Personal Concerns                         | Personal Concerns                         | Personal Concerns                         | Personal Concerns                         | Personal Concerns                         |
| work              | 0.86                                      | 0.98                                      | 14.68                                     | *** (†)                                   | -0.037                                    |
| leisure           | (1.38) 0.72                               | (1.68) 0.79                               | (21.7) 9.39                               | ** (§) *** (†)                            | (-0.088) -0.16                            |
|                   | (0.76) 0.2                                | (0.99) 0.14                               | (30.25) -31.41 (-4.74)                    | * (†)                                     | (-0.08) 0.042                             |
| home              | (0.18)                                    | (0.17)                                    | 24.39                                     | *** (§)                                   | (0.005)                                   |
| money             | 0.17                                      | 0.21 (4.09)                               | (18.12)                                   | *** (†)                                   | -0.029 (-0.035)                           |
|                   | (3.47)                                    | 0.88                                      | 95.96                                     |                                           | -0.112                                    |
| relig             | 0.45 (0.53)                               |                                           | (3.55)                                    | *** (†)                                   |                                           |
|                   | 0.11 (0.4)                                | (0.55) 0.33                               | 187.49                                    |                                           | (-0.006) -0.154                           |
|                   |                                           |                                           |                                           | *** (†)                                   |                                           |
| death             |                                           | (0.54)                                    |                                           |                                           |                                           |
|                   |                                           |                                           | (33.46)                                   |                                           |                                           |
|                   |                                           |                                           |                                           |                                           | (-0.055)                                  |

Table A4: Summary statistics for the labeled MHMisinfo (Misinfo) and non-Misinfo (NMisinfo) videos for the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset

| Platform   | Category   |   # Videos |   # Creators |   Av. Length (s) |   Av. #Views |   Av. #Likes |   Av. #Comments |
|------------|------------|------------|--------------|------------------|--------------|--------------|-----------------|
| YouTube    | NMisinfo   |       6308 |         4259 |            28.77 |        75008 |         3186 |              68 |
|            | Misinfo    |        986 |          875 |            35.46 |        25556 |         1569 |              39 |
| Bitchute   | NMisinfo   |        741 |          318 |              109 |          795 |           20 |              17 |
| Bitchute   | Misinfo    |        146 |          116 |              141 |         1503 |           11 |               6 |

Table A5: Keywords used in the data collection process, number of videos gathered per keyword for each platform and an examplar video title with the keyword

| Keyword                       |   # Videos (Youtube) |   # Videos (Bitchute) | Example Video Title                                                       |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ocd                           |                 1938 |                   163 | If You Said Your Intrusive/OCD Thoughts Out Loud #shorts                  |
| bipolar                       |                 1913 |                   197 | Bipolar Pass? Am I the a hole?                                            |
| depression                    |                 4102 |                   490 | Black Panther Star Letitia Wright Says God Saved Her from Depression-     |
| borderlinepersonalitydisorder |                  478 |                     5 | What is BPD or Borderline Personality Disorder? More on my page!          |
| ptsd                          |                 2309 |                   480 | 100% VA Rating for Mental Disorders - PTSD, Anxiety, De- pression, ...    |
| schizophrenia                 |                  980 |                   501 | Schizophrenia or DEMONS!?                                                 |
| mentalillness                 |                  901 |                   435 | Ben Shapiro discusses Why he thinks Gender Dysphoria is a Mental illness! |
| anorexia                      |                  524 |                    38 | Do you know What anorexia really feels like?                              |
| psychosis                     |                  522 |                   490 | NEUROSCIENTIST WEED Causes PSYCHOSIS and SCHIZOPHRENIA                    |
| autism                        |                 4166 |                   508 | There is no cure for Autism, we just manage the day.                      |
| mentaldisorder                |                  629 |                    27 | #pov : mental disorder more people need to know about                     |
| self-harm                     |                  120 |                   499 | Y/n's suicidal and Pansy makes fun of herTW: mention of self harm         |
| panic-attack                  |                  667 |                     4 | Panic Attack Right Before I Walk Down The Aisle                           |
| obsessivecompulsivedisorder   |                  562 |                     1 | Queen Elizabeth's crippling obsessive compulsive disorder                 |
| suicidal                      |                 1255 |                   484 | 'Why Gender Dysphoric People are feeling Suicidal' - Jordan Peterson      |
| schizophrenic                 |                  592 |                   196 | PARANOID SCHIZOPHRENIC CRAZY STORY                                        |
| adderall                      |                  232 |                    72 | ADDERALL SHORTAGE: Here's What You Can Do About It                        |
| anxiety                       |                 4009 |                   499 | My Son Has Separation Anxiety!!!                                          |
| antidepressants               |                  545 |                   161 | Joe Rogan Opens Up The Truth About Antidepressants                        |
| eating disorder               |                 1987 |                    28 | Un-glamorizing Eating Disorder Recovery                                   |
| adhd                          |                 2462 |                   489 | How To Discuss ADHD With Difficult Teachers                               |
| mentalhealth                  |                 3973 |                   493 | Reflections: Jordan Neely &Mental Health #shorts                          |

| Platform   | Misinfo            |             | NMisinfo   |                               |
|------------|--------------------|-------------|------------|-------------------------------|
|            | n -gram            | SAGE        | n -gram    | SAGE                          |
|            | bread              | 1.931       | mikko      | 0.133                         |
|            | brother            | 1.452       | alice      | 0.132                         |
|            | evil               | 1.437       | stim       | 0.131                         |
|            | schizophrenia      | 1.372       | birthday   | 0.128                         |
|            | kill               | 1.136       | thomas     | 0.127                         |
|            | bipolar            | 1.135       | hair       | 0.125                         |
|            | crazy              | 1.039       | adhd       | 0.123                         |
|            | meds               | 1.035       | mens       | 0.122                         |
|            | mentally           | 0.985       | precious   | 0.116                         |
|            | free               | 0.889       | relatable  | 0.112                         |
|            | illness            | 0.795       | relate     | 0.108                         |
| YouTube    | speaking           | 0.794       | beautiful  | 0.105                         |
|            | he's               | 0.788       | movement   | 0.105                         |
|            | pray               | 0.771       | coping     | 0.104                         |
|            | control            | 0.755       | baby       | 0.101                         |
|            | excuse             | 0.735       | anxiety    | 0.1                           |
|            | jesus              | 0.706       | adorable   | 0.098                         |
|            | looks              | 0.703       | toxic      | 0.098                         |
|            | taking             | 0.663       | teacher    | 0.0976                        |
|            | society            | 0.654       | daughter   | 0.0956                        |
|            | dude               | 0.643       | class      | 0.0936                        |
|            | drugs              | 0.619       | parents    | 0.0926                        |
|            | respect            | 0.617       | spectrum   | 0.0914                        |
|            | book               | 0.590       | autism     | 0.0904                        |
|            | sounds             | 0.590       | school     | 0.0876                        |
|            | sterilize vaccines | 2.442 1.722 | like women | 3 . 7 ∗ 10 - 4 3 . 6 ∗ 10 - 4 |
|            | medical            | 1.698       | year       | 3 . 2 ∗ 10 - 4                |
|            | drugs              | 1.462       | back       | 2 . 9 ∗ 10 - 4                |
|            | doctors            | 1.451       | would      | 2 . 4 ∗ 10 - 4                |
|            | three              | 1.139       | time       | 2 . 3 ∗ 10 - 4                |
|            | vaccine            | 1.109       | woman      | 1 . 97 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | later              | 1.005       | thats      | 1 . 93 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | gender             | 0.989       | look       | 1 . 84 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | shall              | 0.970       | thing      | 1 . 61 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | trust              | 0.945       | want       | 1 . 5 ∗ 10 - 4                |
| Bitchute   | covid              | 0.935       | dont       | 1 . 34 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | brain              | 0.902       | show       | 1 . 33 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | birth              | 0.877       | fuck       | 1 . 3 ∗ 10 - 4                |
|            | bitchute           | 0.826       | right      | 1 . 24 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | channel            | 0.825       | police     | 1 . 18 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | found              | 0.824       | someone    | 1 . 14 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | schools            | 0.817       | need       | 1 . 12 ∗ 10 - 4               |
|            | fear               | 0.816       | doubt      | 9 . 64 ∗ 10 - 5               |
|            | started            | 0.751       | folks      | . 512 ∗ 10 - 5                |
|            | list               | 0.742       | going      | . 346 ∗ 10 - 5                |
|            | health             | 0.734       | cant       | . 022 ∗ 10 - 5                |
|            | body               | 0.723       | mental     | . 904 ∗ 10 - 5                |
|            | also               | 0.689       | cops       | . 044 ∗ 10 - 5                |
|            | month              | 0.687       | good       | 7 . 9 ∗ 10 - 5                |

Table A6: Top-25 most discriminative n-grams for MHMisinfo (Misinfo) comments and non-MHMisinfo (NMisinfo) comments for the MentalMisinfo-Large dataset, identified through the SAGE algorithm.

<!-- image -->

Table A7: Prompt input template for detecting MHMisinfo using LLMs

```
You are an expert in linguistics and social media data. Please analyze the following examples where we determine whether a comment agrees with a video on mental health based on the video's transcription. There are five examples, one on each line. Each example contains the comment and the human-generated answer: Example 1: Video Transcript: [Example 1 Data] Comment: [Comment] Answer: [Yes/No + Reasoning] ...... Example 5: Video Transcript: [Example 5 Data] Comment: [Comment] Answer: [Yes/No + Reasoning] Now, given what you learned from the five examples above, please determine whether the comment agrees with the video or not. Answer with yes or no, and then give your reasoning. Video Transcript: [Target Data] Comment: [Comment] Answer:
```

Table A8: Prompt input template for agreement assessment using LLMs

Table A9: Prompt input template for stigma assessment using LLMs

<!-- image -->