## Non-Determinism of 'Deterministic' LLM Settings

Berk Atil 1 ∗ , Sarp Aykent 2 , Alexa Chittams 2 , Lisheng Fu 2 , Rebecca J. Passonneau 1 , Evan Radcliffe 2 , Guru Rajan Rajagopal 2 , Adam Sloan 2 , Tomasz Tudrej 2 , Ferhan Ture 2 , Zhe Wu 2 , Lixinyu Xu 2 , Breck Baldwin 2

1 Penn State University, 2 Comcast AI Technologies

Correspondence:

{ bka5352,rjp49 } @psu.edu ; breckbaldwin@gmail.com

## Abstract

LLM (large language model) practitioners commonly notice that outputs can vary for the same inputs under settings expected to be deterministic. Yet the questions of how pervasive this is, and with what impact on results, have not to our knowledge been systematically investigated. We investigate non-determinism in five LLMs configured to be deterministic when applied to eight common tasks in across 10 runs, in both zero-shot and few-shot settings. We see accuracy variations up to 15% across naturally occurring runs with a gap of best possible performance to worst possible performance up to 70%. In fact, none of the LLMs consistently delivers repeatable accuracy across all tasks, much less identical output strings. Sharing preliminary results with insiders has revealed that non-determinism perhaps essential to the efficient use of compute resources via co-mingled data in input buffers so this issue is not going away anytime soon. To better quantify our observations, we introduce metrics focused on quantifying determinism, TARr@N for the total agreement rate at N runs over raw output, and TARa@Nfor total agreement rate of parsed-out answers. Our code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/breckbaldwin/llm-stability.

## 1 Introduction

Large Language Models (LLM) perform well on many types of NLP or NLP-related tasks, including question answering (Robinson &amp; Wingate, 2023), diverse types of reasoning (Qiao et al., 2023), code generation (Jiang et al., 2024b), and the like. Given their general applicability and their widespread adoption for diverse, high-stakes societal functions, such as information gathering in medicine (Shool et al., 2025) or law (Niklaus et al., 2024), financial planning (de Zarz` a i Cubero et al., 2024), or manufacturing optimization (Du et al., 2025) to name a few, there has been increasing attention to reliability (e.g., for Outof-Distribution behavior (Liu et al., 2024; Du et al., 2022)), alongside other aspects of LLM trustworthiness (Shridhar et al., 2024; Chen &amp; Mueller, 2024). A laudable dimension of the LLM field as a whole is the broad use of benchmark datasets: you know what you are buying against an objective metric. However, what is the value of such benchmarks if LLM results are not stable across multiple runs? One aspect of reliability that has not to our knowledge been addressed sufficiently in the literature is lack of user control over variance in LLM output across LLMs and platforms under settings that are assumed to be deterministic. We demonstrate an alarming degree of variation across equivalent input runs with a varied collection of high performing LLMs under presumed deterministic settings. Our findings suggest there is far too much uncertainty in a realm where robust engineering is the expectation.

Besides training procedure and data, hyper-parameters such as temperature, top-k, topp, and repetition penalty can affect model performance significantly (Wang et al., 2023).

∗ Berk Atil completed this work during his internship at Comcast AI Technologies

Max Min Accuracy Difference

8

4-

2

gpt-3.5-turbo\_Oshot

gpt-3.5-turbo\_few

gpt-40\_Oshot

Europ. hist.

navigation gpt-40\_few mixtral-8x7b\_Oshot mixtral-8x7b\_few

Figure 1: Percentage difference between maximum and minimum accuracy in 10 runs per model, for 5 models on 8 tasks with zero-shot and few-shot settings.

<!-- image -->

Top-k and top-p shrink sampling space based on the probabilities, whereas temperature modifies the probability distribution over the vocabulary (Wang et al., 2020; 2023). When the temperature is high, the distribution flattens; however, when it is closer to 0, the model is supposed to be more deterministic. Many users of LLM platforms expect model performance to be deterministic when temperature=0. While many other users may have observed a degree of non-determinism in this setting, there is little if any quantification of this variance. We refer here to this behavior of output variance despite zero temperature as instability. 1

Despite known uncertainty across different training runs of neural networks, it has become standard to measure LLM performance on benchmark datasets by reporting a single result (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Suzgun et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Gema et al., 2024; Rein et al., 2023), possibly due to cost and computational time restrictions. However, if there is a significant variance in the output across identical training runs, this reduces the validity of the benchmarks given that measures of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals) are often not included. Here we look at an additional source of uncertainty, performance variance from the same trained model on the same inputs when temperature=0.

In this work, we analyze the instability of various families of models on tasks from two common benchmarks: Massive Multititask Language Understanding (MMLU) (Hendrycks et al., 2021)) and BIG-Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2023)). Figure 1 shows that models are not deterministic, and that the degree of instability changes from model to model, setting to setting, and task to task. Therefore, performance instability can doubtless impact the ranked performance of models. Our specific contributions include:

- Two metrics, TARr@N (total agreement rate for raw data across N runs) and TARa@N (total agreement rate for parsed answer across N runs) for LLM instability to capture the variability in answer accuracy and in the output word spans.
- Quantification of LLM instability over 8 tasks randomly selected from two common benchmarks: BBH and MMLU.
- Comparison across settings, including zero-shot and few-shot (3 for BBH, 5 for MMLUas in the standard settings).
- Correlation analysis of instability with accuracy, input length, and output length.
- Data from runs and source code. 2

Our systematic investigation is structured into the following sections: Introduction, Related Work, Controlling LLM Determinism, Datasets, Methods, Experiments, Results, Discussion, and Conclusion.

1 In this paper, we use stability/instability and determinism/non-determinism interchangeably.

2 Download URL will be made available if paper is accepted

llama-3-8b\_oshot

## 2 Related Work

There have been investigations on the robustness of machine learning (ML) models with trivial changes to the input (Sehwag et al., 2019; Freiesleben &amp; Grote, 2023; Hancox-Li, 2020; Rauber et al., 2017). However, we are interested in the changes in the response when everything in the input is the same. Biderman et al. (2024) introduce a standard evaluation toolkit for LLMs and suggest best practices for reproducibility; instability, however, is not addressed. Works that mention instability include (Song et al., 2024), which analyzes the effect of temperature, sampling strategy, repetition penalty, and alignment algorithms on the performance. While this work finds that LLMs have some variance in the output that should be taken into account in the evaluation benchmarks, they use a temperature of 1, thereby introducing the variability that our study seeks to minimize. Ouyang et al. (2025) do a similar instability analysis of a single model, ChatGPT, with varying temperatures on a single type of task, code generation. Lastly, Holtzman et al. (2020) mention the freedom in text generation which might lead to different outputs for the same inputs, but they do not talk about the parameters that affect this behaviour. To the best of our knowledge, no work systematically investigates LLM instability given the same inputs and configurations (zero-shot and few-shot) with maximally deterministic hyper-parameters.

## 3 Controlling LLM Determinism

Determinism is an important yet often overlooked challenge, with variations in practice across platforms. Temperature is the key parameter, with 0 being the most deterministic value and 1 the least. Equation 1 shows the probability of word i where T is temperature and yi is the LLM logit.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When T is set to 0, the LLM should theoretically produce the same output given the same prompt. T can be raised to diversify outputs. We confirmed that other potentially relevant hyper-parameters, such as top-p (the smallest set of tokens with probabilities summing to p ) have little effect on determinism.

## 4 Datasets

To ensure that our investigation of instability includes diverse Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, we turned to two widely used multiple-choice benchmarks: Beyond the Imitation Game Benchmark Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2023), with 27 diverse tasks from mathematics, commonsense reasoning and other domains; Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) (Hendrycks et al., 2021), with 57 tasks across disciplines including the humanities, social sciences, and STEM areas. To balance diversity against computational resources, we randomly selected four subtasks from each benchmark. Table 1 lists the tasks, number of examples, and number of multiple-choice options.

## 5 Methods

For our investigation of instability, or non-determinism of zero-temperature settings, we perform experiments on models without fine-tuning in both zero-shot and few-shot prompting (without Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022)). Regarding the number of examples for few-shot, we use the standard settings of 3-shot for BBH tasks, and 5-shot for MMLU tasks. We set the temperature at 0, top-p at 1, and fix the seed. We use the same compute infrastructure, inputs, and configurations.

5

4

3

2-

1

0.50

0.55

llama-3-70b\_mmlu\_college\_mathematics

Table 1: Eight tasks from BBH and MMLU with brief descriptions, number of examples, and number of answer options.

| Task                           | Descrip.                               |   Size |   Options |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------|-----------|
| BBH: navigation                | does path end at start                 |    250 |         2 |
| BBH: ruin names                | humorous edit of a band or movie title |    250 |         4 |
| BBH: geometric shapes          | shape given SVG format                 |    250 |        10 |
| BBH: logical deduct. 3 objects | order of 3 objects given constraints   |    250 |         3 |
| MMLU: h. s. Europ. hist.       | identical                              |    165 |         4 |
| MMLU: college math             | identical                              |    100 |         4 |
| MMLU: prof. accounting         | identical                              |    282 |         4 |
| MMLU: public rel.              | media theory, crisis mgmt., etc.       |    110 |         4 |

Figure 2: Accuracy over 20 identical runs on college math, temperature=0, top-p=1. Median in blue, mean in black with dashed 5% and 95% quantiles.

<!-- image -->

## 5.1 Models

Wechose five top performing models from different families and with varying sizes: GPT-3.5 Turbo (Brown et al., 2020), GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024), Llama-3-70B-Instruct (Meta, 2024), Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Meta, 2024), and Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct (Jiang et al., 2024a).

## 5.2 Metrics

To quantify instability, we collect accuracy across a set of runs in the same condition (model × dataset). We also define five metrics specifically to quantify instability for each condition that capture the extremes of positive and negative accuracy. In addition, we report median accuracy to see the deviation from median as well. Note that we do not report standard deviations of means because the distributions across runs for a given condition are not normally distributed (see below).

- Total agreement rate@N (TAR@N): the percentage of test set questions across N runs where generated answers are all identical, regardless of whether the answer was correct . We have two variants of TAR@N:
- -TARr@N (TAR@N for the raw model response) The LLM responses are string equivalent.
- -TARa@N (TAR@N for the answer) The parsed answers are the same, e.g., 'The answer is a)' is the same as 'a) is the answer'.

Table 2: BestAcc, Median Accuracy, WorstAcc on top; TARa@10, TARr@10 on bottom, for the few-shot conditions (3 for BBH, 5 for MMLU, see section 5). Results are in terms of percentages.

| Task                                                                                                  | gpt3.5                                                                                                                                  | gpt4o                                                                                                                                   | llama8b                                                                                                                                 | llama70b                                                                                                                                | mixtral8-7b                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Accuracy Results                                                                                      | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        |
| navigation geo. shapes logical deduct. public rel. Europ. hist. ruin names prof. account college math | 96.8, 95.6, 93.2 72.4, 59.6, 46.8 88.8, 81.6, 75.2 75.5, 69.1, 65.5 83.6, 81.2, 78.2 72.0, 58.0, 44.8 52.5, 50.9, 48.9 39.0, 38.0, 34.0 | 98.8, 98.8, 98.4 82.4, 68.4, 53.6 100., 100., 99.6 80.0, 76.4, 73.6 89.1, 81.5, 72.1 93.2, 90.8, 88.4 89.0, 74.5, 57.8 88.0, 69.0, 44.0 | 82.0, 80.2, 78.0 49.2, 40.6, 32.8 95.6, 90.2, 81.2 63.6, 61.8, 61.8 74.5, 67.0, 59.4 68.4, 66.8, 64.4 48.2, 45.4, 44.0 50.0, 22.5, 04.0 | 95.2, 94.6, 93.6 67.2, 57.0, 47.2 98.0, 96.4, 95.2 67.3, 60.5, 53.6 61.8, 50.3, 41.2 89.2, 87.2, 84.4 78.0, 67.2, 55.3 85.0, 54.5, 22.0 | 84.4, 79.0, 71.6 54.4, 27.8, 08.8 87.6, 75.0, 64.0 58.2, 48.2, 36.4 65.5, 51.5, 35.8 78.8, 67.6, 55.6 67.0, 39.0, 13.1 75.0, 31.5, 03.0 |
| TAR Results                                                                                           | TAR Results                                                                                                                             | TAR Results                                                                                                                             | TAR Results                                                                                                                             | TAR Results                                                                                                                             | TAR Results                                                                                                                             |
| navigation geo. shapes logical deduct. public rel. Europ. hist. ruin names prof. account college math | 96.4, 46.0 62.8, 25.2 84.4, 34.8 87.3, 82.7 94.5, 70.9 66.0, 05.6 91.1, 76.6 89.0, 76.0                                                 | 99.6, 46.0 63.2, 00.0 99.6, 36.8 92.7, 37.3 81.2, 09.1 95.2, 00.0 66.7, 04.6 50.0, 00.0                                                 | 96.0, 86.0 58.8, 27.6 85.2, 50.0 96.4, 73.6 82.4, 07.3 88.4, 47.6 89.0, 52.1 22.0, 00.0                                                 | 98.4, 64.0 66.4, 18.0 97.2, 49.6 81.8, 17.3 73.3, 22.4 94.4, 10.8 69.5, 00.0 25.0, 00.0                                                 | 84.8, 50.0 12.0, 02.4 74.8, 16.4 62.7, 10.9 55.2, 23.6 70.4, 24.8 23.4, 00.7 07.0, 00.0                                                 |

- The best possible accuracy over N runs (BestAcc), which is the maximum possible accuracy that could be extracted from N runs. For each question, if there is a run in which the answer is correct, that question is marked as correctly answered.
- The worst possible accuracy over N runs (WorstAcc), which is the minimum possible accuracy that could be extracted from N runs. For each question, if there is a run in which the answer is incorrect, that question is marked as incorrectly answered.
- Median accuracy over N runs.
- Maximum-minimum accuracy difference over N runs. Note that this is different from BestAcc and WorstAcc because we look at the actual accuracy scores for each run instead of focusing on worst case and best case scenarios.

TARr@N score is the strictest metric of instability, since any character variation will result in a disagreement. Thus it is possible for a set of runs to have 100% accuracy and 100% TARa@N combined with 0% TARr@N.

To examine the distributional qualities of accuracy scores, we did 20 runs of GPT-4o and Llama-3-70b on college math in few-shot, which are two of the more unstable examples. The results shown in Figure 2 clearly show non-normal distributions, with mean and median values far from the mode. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test (Massey Jr, 1951) rejected the normal hypothesis with a p-value &lt; 10 -9 .

## 6 Experiments

Our eight datasets, five base models and two settings (zero/few-shot) yield eighty conditions. For each condition, we perform ten runs with temperature at zero to quantify the amount of instability within a run.

## 7 Results

## 7.1 Instability Results

Figure 1 summarizes the extremes observed across our eight datasets for the five models in zero-shot and few-shot settings. The y-axis is the percentage difference between the

100

100

80 -

80 -

60 -

60 -

40-

40-

20- gpt-3.5-turbo

20- average\_model

Europ. hist.

Europ. hist.

navigation

navigation

gpt-3.5-turbo public rel.

public rel.

TARr

TARa

llama-3-8b mixtral-8x7b llama-3-70b Ideal

Figure 3: TARr@10 for each model in the few-shot setting. Dataset colors have been chosen to distinguish them by relatively challenging (increasingly dark red hues) versus relatively easy (increasingly dark blue hues).

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: TARa@10 for each task in the few-shot setting. Models colors have been chosen to distinguish them by relatively low performing (increasingly dark red hues) versus relatively high performing (increasingly dark blue hues).

<!-- image -->

minimum and maximum accuracies in ten runs for each condition. Notably, there are 5-15% differences on some tasks.

The top of Table 2 reports BestAcc, median accuracy and WorstAcc in the few-shot conditions for our five models (zero-shot results show a similar degree of non-determinism, with varying consistency across conditions, see Table 3 in Appendix A.2). The lower half of the table reports TARa@10 and TARr@10. When there is a gap between BestAcc and WorstAcc &gt; 10 there is often very low TARr@10 (e.g., gpt3.5 on geometric shapes, logical deduction, ruin names; gpt4o on public relations, European history professional accounting, college math; and so on). Notably, TARr@10 is typically fairly low, and there is a lot of variation across models and datasets. Unsuprisingly, TARa@10 can be much higher than TARr@10 because of the flexibility of answer parsing that is not available for the raw outputs. Overall, models show a high degree of instability at both the raw output level but at the accuracy level as well.

Figure 3 shows the TARr@10 for each task and model in a few-shot setting (for zero-shot scores, see Figure 12 in Appendix A.2). GPT-3.5 Turbo has lower TARr (less instability) than other models, while Llama-3-70B often has very low TARr.

TARr - 1.00

TARa - 0.70

max-min-diff - -0.62

0.70

1.00

-0.90

median\_acc - 0.28

0.72

median\_input\_len - -0.11 -0.10

Few-shot

-0.90

0.72

1.00

-0.63

0.10

median\_output\_len - -0.64 -0.58

0.52

median\_acc

-0.63

-0.10

0.10

Spearman Correlation Matrix

-0.58

0.52

1.00

Zero-shot

-0.68

0.74

0.74

1.00

0.05 - 0.10

1-0.77

-0.68 -0.77

1.00

0.52

-0.20

-0.14

0.16

-0.74

-0.79

0.66

1.0

- 0.8

- 0.6

- 0.4

- 0.2

<!-- image -->

max-min-diff

Figure 5: Spearman correlation matrix between metrics in few-shot setting (on the left) and zero-shot setting (on the right).

Figure 4 shows TARa@10 for each condition in a few-shot setting (see Figure 11 in Appendix A.2 for zero-shot). While the TARa@10 results show less instability than TARr@10 they are still far from perfect and show very task-specific behavior. The high-performance for the navigation task indicate that leaderboards on this task can be expected to be more reliable. On the other hand, the more scattered results for the college math and professional accounting tasks indicate that results reported on these tasks might not be as robust.

## 7.2 Correlation Analyses

We perform a Spearman rank correlation analysis on all pairs of the following metrics: TARa@10, TARr@10, maximum minimum accuracy difference, median accuracy, median input length, and output length. Heat map results are shown in Figure 5 for the few-shot and zero-shot prompted models. Here we define accuracy as the median accuracy over the 10 runs with the same model and dataset setup. Input length and output length are median word counts split by space, calculated over the input and output of each LLM experiment setup. We split the words by space instead of using a particular tokenizer, as the models we experimented with use different tokenizers.

The results show a strong/moderate negative correlation between the output length and TARa@10, as well as between the output length and TARr@10 in few-shot/zero-shot settings. Note this is also consistent with the positive correlation of output length with max-min-diff. These correlations mean that as an LLM's output length increases, the instability of the output increases, resulting in more diverse natural language responses as well as the actual multiple choice answer prediction. The strong negative correlation between LLM output length and instability could motivate those using LLMs commercially to restrict the max generation tokens to control the instability. We also see a strong positive correlation between median accuracy and TARa@10 in the few-shot setting. This indicates that when the LLM is more accurate it becomes more deterministic for multiple choice selections. Additionally, in the few-shot setting, there is a moderate negative correlation between the output length and median accuracy, which indicates that restricting max generation tokens improves both determinisim and accuracy. This is in parallel with the findings in (Zhang et al., 2024).

In addition to general correlations, we also look at correlation maps per model to see how general findings apply to each. We find that all models are more stable when they generate shorter responses. Notably, Mixtral and Llama-3 models are more stable when they are more accurate in few-shot setting but the effect varies in zero-shot setting. Last but not least, GPT-3.5 is more stable when the input is longer in the few-shot setting and the effect is less significant in zero-shot setting. These correlation map figures can be found in Appendix A.1.

## 8 Discussion

Theoretically, at zero temperature the LLM should be deterministic given the same input, with values of 100% for TARa@10 and TAR@10, the same values for BestAcc and WorstAcc, and 0% difference in the minimum and maximum values across all tasks.

The TARr@10 scores show that models are not stable at the string variation level but far more stable at the parsed answer level. String variation does not affect a human reader much because we can extract the same answer even if the output format is different, but a downstream system that needs to parse the LLM response can be affected significantly when the format or pattern is different. This should be taken into account when using LLMs.

TARa@10 values are much more consistent than TARr@10, yet still lead to high instablity of up to 15% shown in Figure 1. One caveat is that our answer extraction system has many hard-coded parts, which reduces the generality of the system. Therefore, we have no guarantee that raw outputs will lead to the exactly the same results for our various accuracy metrics, if the experiments are repeated.

The maximum-minimum accuracy difference should be 0% theoretically. All models demonstrate considerable variation on this metric. Mixtral-8x7b on college math is 72% (75% 3%) for a particularly bad example on suggesting a truly random element in the generative process driving the minimum value to 0%. This instability lowers confidence in the reliability of reporting only a single number in LLM benchmarks. We encourage reporting maximum-minimum scores across runs to have a more robust comparison of models.

## 8.1 Implications for Practical Engineering

Although the use of multiple GPUs introduces some randomness (Nvidia, 2024), it can be eliminated by setting random seeds, so that AI models are deterministic given the same input. In that case, performance errors could be attributed to the model's generalization capability (e.g., under-/over-fitting). However, engineering optimizations to run LLMs faster, such as continuous batching, chunk prefilling, or prefix caching, might lead to nondeterministic behavior. Since many of the the models are close-sourced (GPT-3-5, GPT-4o), and all are hosted behind APIs we don't control, we can only speculate about the reason for this behavior. In order to support this line of reasoning, we ran Llama3-8b on our local GPUs without any optimizations, yielding deterministic results. This indicates that the models and GPUs themselves are not the only source of non-determinism.

Additionally, we fine-tuned gpt-3.5 using two-fold cross validation. Although, the results indicate that fine-tuning helps reduce instability, we hypothesize that a fine tuned model cannot be shared across users and as such our tasks were the only ones being run.

Non-deterministic AI brings new challenges to developers, especially in commercial applications:

- The usage of unit tests for AI functions is limited because of non-determinism. An alternative might be regression testing that tolerates variability.
- Low stability might also increase the potential for inexplicable errors that are very different from human mistakes such as responding as 'none of the above' when the task is a multiple choice selection.
- Instability of the format of the outputs can result in downstream parser failures.
- Assuming that errors due to non-determinism and errors due to system performance are IID (independently, identically distributed), together they produce multiplicative performance reductions. For instance, the performance of a dialog system that uses non-deterministic LLM classifiers to manage transitions would degrade with each additional state in the sequence of dialog states. Specifically, a dialog system with 4 classifiers that are 95% stable will show .95 4 = .814 expected performance before even factoring in the accuracy of the classifier on novel inputs.
- One of the most important effects is in system complexity that has to handle gracefully 'usually correct but this time wrong' results. Zipfian distributions are com-

monly seen in applied AI systems where the frequency of an input/category is inversely related to its rank in count sorted order, f requency ∝ 1/ rank . Testing tends to concentrate on the frequent events and that delivers confidence that the resulting system is stable for the common inputs. However, the lack of stability undermines the entire foundation of this confidence, especially if mistakes are costly.

## 9 Conclusion

We have made a systematic analysis of the determinism of LLMs with the hyper-parameters that should maximize it. Our results show that LLMs can be very non-deterministic in standard setups. Furthermore, an LLM rarely produces the same response ten times given the same input; however, the parsed answer is often more stable. The observation that instability results are not normally distributed makes it more difficult to measure the resulting uncertainty. Lastly, instability is highly variable across tasks for the same model, and across models for the same task.

Other questions about instability remain to be explored. For instance, how can we reduce the instability of LLMs during training or inference time (e.g., adding a meta prompt to indicate the model is only allowed to answer with a single letter)? Second, how can the instability of LLMs be taken into account in business products? Third, how should we communicate with decision-makers about instability? Last but not least, more analysis could be done to see if there is any correlation between the stability and specific types of errors, such as false positives and false negatives.

## References

- Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Lintang Sutawika, Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Alham Fikri Aji, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Sidney Black, Jordan Clive, et al. Lessons from the trenches on reproducible evaluation of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14782 , 2024.
- Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877-1901, 2020.
- Jiuhai Chen and Jonas Mueller. Quantifying uncertainty in answers from any language model and enhancing their trustworthiness. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 5186-5200, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.283. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.283/ .
- Irene de Zarz` a i Cubero, Joaquim de Curt` o i D´ ıaz, Gemma Roig, and Carlos T Calafate. Optimized financial planning: Integrating individual and cooperative budgeting models with llm recommendations. 2024.
- Kaze Du, Bo Yang, Keqiang Xie, Nan Dong, Zhengping Zhang, Shilong Wang, and Fan Mo. Llm-manuf: An integrated framework of fine-tuning large language models for intelligent decision-making in manufacturing. Advanced Engineering Informatics , 65:103263, 2025.
- Xuefeng Du, Zhaoning Wang, Mu Cai, and Sharon Li. Towards unknown-aware learning with virtual outlier synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TW7d65uYu5M .
- Timo Freiesleben and Thomas Grote. Beyond generalization: a theory of robustness in machine learning. Synthese , 202(4):109, 2023.

- Aryo Pradipta Gema, Joshua Ong Jun Leang, Giwon Hong, Alessio Devoto, Alberto Carlo Maria Mancino, Rohit Saxena, Xuanli He, Yu Zhao, Xiaotang Du, Mohammad Reza Ghasemi Madani, et al. Are we done with MMLU? arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04127 , 2024.
- Leif Hancox-Li. Robustness in machine learning explanations: does it matter? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAT* '20, pp. 640-647, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450369367. doi: 10.1145/3351095.3372836. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372836 .
- Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= d7KBjmI3GmQ .
- Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH .
- Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, L´ elio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Th´ eophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timoth´ ee Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mixtral of experts, 2024a. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2401.04088 .
- Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim. A survey on large language models for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00515 , 2024b.
- Bo Liu, Li-Ming Zhan, Zexin Lu, Yujie Feng, Lei Xue, and Xiao-Ming Wu. How good are LLMs at out-of-distribution detection? In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pp. 8211-8222, Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.720/ .
- Frank J Massey Jr. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for goodness of fit. Journal of the American statistical Association , 46(253):68-78, 1951.
- Meta. Introducing Meta Llama 3: The most capable openly available LLM to date. https: //ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3 , 2024.
- Joel Niklaus, Veton Matoshi, Matthias St¨ urmer, Ilias Chalkidis, and Daniel Ho. MultiLegalPile: A 689GB multilingual legal corpus. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 15077-15094, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.805. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.805/ .
- Nvidia. Floating point and ieee 754 compliance for nvidia gpus. https://docs.nvidia.com/ cuda/floating-point/index.html , 2024.
- OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings,

Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix, Sim´ on Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David M´ ely, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O'Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cer´ on Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vijayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. GPT-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 .

- Shuyin Ouyang, Jie M. Zhang, Mark Harman, and Meng Wang. An empirical study of the non-determinism of ChatGPT in code generation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 34(2), January 2025. doi: 10.1145/3697010.
- Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Ningyu Zhang, Xiang Chen, Yunzhi Yao, Shumin Deng, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Reasoning with language model prompting: A survey. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 5368-5393, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.294. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.294 .
- Jonas Rauber, Wieland Brendel, and Matthias Bethge. Foolbox: A python toolbox to benchmark the robustness of machine learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.04131 , 2017.
- David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. Gpqa: A graduate-level googleproof q&amp;a benchmark, 2023.

- Joshua Robinson and David Wingate. Leveraging large language models for multiple choice question answering. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=yKbprarjc5B .
- Vikash Sehwag, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Liwei Song, Chawin Sitawarin, Daniel Cullina, Mung Chiang, and Prateek Mittal. Analyzing the robustness of open-world machine learning. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security , AISec'19, pp. 105-116, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450368339. doi: 10.1145/3338501.3357372. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3338501. 3357372 .
- Sina Shool, Sara Adimi, Reza Saboori Amleshi, Ehsan Bitaraf, Reza Golpira, and Mahmood Tara. A systematic review of large language model (llm) evaluations in clinical medicine. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making , 25(1):117, 2025.
- Kumar Shridhar, Koustuv Sinha, Andrew Cohen, Tianlu Wang, Ping Yu, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Mrinmaya Sachan, Jason Weston, and Asli Celikyilmaz. The ART of LLM refinement: Ask, refine, and trust. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 58725883, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10. 18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.327. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.327/ .
- Yifan Song, Guoyin Wang, Sujian Li, and Bill Yuchen Lin. The good, the bad, and the greedy: Evaluation of LLMs should not ignore non-determinism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10457 , 2024.
- Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Sch¨ arli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging BIG-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 13003-13051, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.824. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.824 .
- Chi Wang, Xueqing Liu, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Cost-effective hyperparameter optimization for large language model generation inference. In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning , pp. 21-1. PMLR, 2023.
- Pei-Hsin Wang, Sheng-Iou Hsieh, Shieh-Chieh Chang, Jia-Yu Pan, Yu-Ting Chen, Wei Wei, and Da-Cheng Juan. Contextual temperature for language modeling, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1x9004YPr .
- Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, et al. MMLU-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01574 , 2024.
- Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824-24837, 2022.

̸

- Yusen Zhang, Sarkar Snigdha Sarathi Das, and Rui Zhang. Verbosity = veracity: Demystify verbosity compensation behavior of large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2411.07858 .

## A Appendix

- A.1 Correlation Matrices Per Model
- A.2 Zero-shot Results

TARr - 1.00

TARr - 1.00

TARr - 1.00

TARa - 0.93

TARa - 0.69

TARa - 0.52

max-min-diff --0.51

Spearman Correlation Matrix for gpt-35-turbo

Few-shot

Few-shot

Few-shot

-0.79

-0.78

-0.97

0.95

0.29

0.40

1.00

-0.41

0.69

0.52

0.93

1.00

1.00

1.00

max-min-diff - -0.68

-0.78

-0.97

1.00

-0.31

-0.88

max-min-diff --0.79 -0.79

1.00

median\_acc-

-0.88

-0.31

median\_acc - -0.19

0.29

0.95

0.61

median\_acc - 0.45 0.40

-0.41

median\_input\_len --0.60

median \_input\_len - -0.27 0.01 0.12 0.10

median\_input\_len - -0.43

-0.48

median\_output\_len - -0.77

median\_output\_len - -0.67

median\_output\_len - -0.66

-0.21

0.08

0.24 0.29

-0.56

-0.35

0.43

0.31 -0.31

-0.52

0.66

median acc

-0.21

-0.56

0.01 -0.35

-0.48 -0.52

0.24

0.08

0.12

0.31

0.43

Spearman Correlation Matrix for gpt-40

Spearman Correlation Matrix for llama3-8b

1.00

1.00

Zero-shot

Zero-shot

Zero-shot

0.50

0.62

1.00 0.93

0.62

0.93

-0.69

-0.38 0.50

-0.28

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.60

-0.43

-0.34

-0.87

-0.71

0.50

-0.38

-0.87

0.95

-0.18

-0.32

0.38

0.76

0.21

1.00

-0.69 -0.71

1.00

-0.08

-0.90

-0.93

-0.56

0.05

-0.14

-0.19

-0.67

-0.46

-0.64

0.27

-0.19

-0.04

0.57

0.43

0.69

~ 1.00

1.0

1.0

- 0.8

- 0.75

- 0.8

- 0.6

- 0.50

- 0.6

- 0.4

- 0.25

- 0.4

- 0.2

- 0.2

0.66

-0.28 -0.34

1.00

0.30

0.43

<!-- image -->

max-min-diff

max-min-diff

median\_acc

max-min-diff

median\_acc

Figure 6: Spearman correlation matrix for GPT-4o between metrics in few-shot setting (on the left) and zero-shot setting (on the right).

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: Spearman correlation matrix for GPT-3.5-turbo between metrics in few-shot setting (on the left) and zero-shot setting (on the right).

Figure 8: Spearman correlation matrix for Llama-8b between metrics in few-shot setting (on the left) and zero-shot setting (on the right).

<!-- image -->

100

90-

80 - TARr - 1.00

TARr - 1.00

TARa - 0.86

TARa - 0.69

70 -

max-min-diff - -0.69

60 -

max-min-diff - -0.32

50- median\_acc - 0.86

median\_acc - 0.37

40-

median \_input\_len - 0.36

Spearman Correlation Matrix for llama3-70b

Spearman Correlation Matrix for mixtral-8x7b

Few-shot

Few-shot

-0.83

0.95

0.79

-0.76

1.00

-0.88

0.69

0.86

1.00

1.00

-0.76

-0.83

1.00

-0.67

0.95

-0.67

0.79

-0.88

-0.02 0.05 -0.14

median \_input\_len - 0.24 -0.02 0.26

gpt -3.5-turbo

30

average\_model

median\_output\_len - -0.75 -0.81

median\_output\_len --0.76 -0.86

0.60

0.38

median\_acc

-0.02

-0.02

0.05

-0.81

-0.86

0.60

0.26 0.38

1.00

1.00

0.74

0.36

0.36

0.74

Zero-shot

Zero-shot

-0.54

-0.64

0.38

-0.17 -0.34

1.00

1.00

-0.32

-0.71

-0.54

-0.64 -0.71

-0.32 1.00

1.00

-0.05

0.88

0.05

-0.04

-0.63

0.38

0.51

-0.24 -0.18

-0.87

-0.90

-0.83

-0.46

0.48

0.69

- 1.00

1.00

- 0.75

- 0.75

- 0.50

- 0.50

- 0.25

- 0.25

<!-- image -->

max-min-diff

max-min-diff

median\_acc

public rel.

Figure 9: Spearman correlation matrix for Llama-70b between metrics in few-shot setting (on the left) and zero-shot setting (on the right).

<!-- image -->

Figure 10: Spearman correlation matrix for Mixtral-8x7b between metrics in few-shot setting (on the left) and zero-shot setting (on the right).

Figure 11: TARa@10 for each task in the zero-shot setting. Models colors have been chosen to distinguish them by relatively low performing (increasingly dark red hues) versus relatively high performing (increasingly dark blue hues).

<!-- image -->

Europ. hist.

navigation TARa

100

80-

60 -

40- average\_model

20-

Europ. hist.

navigation

gpt-3.5-turbo gpt-40

llama-3-8b mixtral-8x7b llama-3-70b TARr

Table 3: BestAcc, Median Accuracy, WorstAcc on top; TARa@10, TARr@10 on bottom, for the zero-shot conditions. Results are in terms of percentages.

| Task                                                                                                  | gpt3.5                                                                                                                                  | gpt4o                                                                                                                                    | llama8b                                                                                                                                 | llama70b                                                                                                                               | mixtral8-7b                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Accuracy Results                                                                                      | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                         | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                       | Accuracy Results                                                                                                                        |
| navigation geo. shapes logical deduct. public rel. Europ. hist. ruin names prof. account college math | 67.2, 64.8, 61.6 16.8, 15.2, 13.6 52.8, 50.8, 48.8 66.4, 65.0, 61.8 75.2, 74.5, 72.7 67.2, 65.6, 65.2 60.3, 53.2, 47.5 54.0, 32.0, 15.0 | 94.8, 92.0, 88.8 76.0, 56.8, 30.4 100.0, 98.6, 96.0 81.8, 75.5, 66.4 76.4, 65.2, 55.2 85.2, 83.2, 80.0 84.0, 72.0, 58.5 85.0, 59.0, 41.0 | 88.4, 73.0, 54.0 24.4, 18.8, 12.0 72.4, 62.8, 55.6 28.2, 25.0, 19.1 38.8, 34.2, 30.3 54.8, 50.6, 45.6 36.2, 29.1, 25.5 55.0, 34.0, 17.0 | 94.0, 88.0, 78.4 44.4, 21.6, 6.4 95.6, 92.2, 87.6 39.1, 26.4, 13.6 41.2, 27.9, 19.4 67.6, 60.0, 51.2 54.6, 38.7, 24.8 77.0, 58.0, 40.0 | 66.0, 57.6, 48.0 29.6, 27.0, 24.8 70.0, 59.6, 49.6 57.3, 46.8, 35.5 66.1, 56.1, 45.5 38.0, 34.4, 30.4 42.9, 28.9, 20.2 57.0, 31.5, 13.0 |
| TAR Results                                                                                           | TAR Results                                                                                                                             | TAR Results                                                                                                                              | TAR Results                                                                                                                             | TAR Results                                                                                                                            | TAR Results                                                                                                                             |
| navigation geo. shapes logical deduct. public rel. Europ. hist. ruin names prof. account college math | 94.4, 94.4 91.6, 91.6 92.8, 90.4 92.7, 86.4 94.5, 94.5 95.6, 97.2 81.9, 49.3 46.0, 10.0                                                 | 91.6, 15.2 45.6, 0.8 96.8, 7.6 83.6, 38.2 74.5, 17.0 93.6, 27.6 71.3, 4.3 50.0, 0.0                                                      | 65.2, 9.2 60.4, 31.2 80.4, 37.6 82.7, 46.4 77.6, 41.2 86.8, 26.8 77.0, 44.0 45.0, 3.0                                                   | 83.2, 4.8 39.2, 5.6 92.0, 16.4 56.4, 0.9 53.9, 6.1 79.2, 11.6 57.8, 2.1 54.0, 0.0                                                      | 77.6, 3.2 90.4, 83.6 74.4, 14.0 61.8, 10.0 63.6, 19.4 82.4, 20.8 48.2, 4.3 29.0, 2.0                                                    |

Figure 12: TARr@10 for each model in the zero-shot setting. Dataset colors have been chosen to distinguish them by relatively challenging (increasingly dark red hues) versus relatively easy (increasingly dark blue hues).

<!-- image -->

• Ideal