## SandboxAQ's submission to MRL 2024 Shared Task on Multi-lingual Multi-task Information Retrieval

Isidora Chara Tourni

isidora.tourni@gmail.com

Brenda Miao

brenda.miao@gmail.com

## Abstract

This paper explores the problems of Question Answering (QA) and Named Entity Recognition (NER) in five diverse languages. We tested five Large Language Models with various prompting methods, including zero-shot, chain-of-thought reasoning, and translation techniques. Our results show that while some models consistently outperform others, their effectiveness varies significantly across tasks and languages. We saw that advanced prompting techniques generally improved QA performance but had mixed results for NER; and we observed that language difficulty patterns differed between tasks. Our findings highlight the need for task-specific approaches in multilingual NLP and suggest that current models may develop different linguistic competencies for different tasks.

## 1 Introduction

The need for effective multilingual information retrieval systems has never been more pressing. Despite rapid advancements in the fields of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Neural Machine Translation (NMT), creating systems that can operate across diverse languages and tasks remains a significant challenge (Hu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024a,b; Guo et al., 2024; Elmahdy et al., 2024). We addressed this need as part of our participation in the MRL 2024 Shared Task on Multi-lingual Multi-task Information Retrieval 1 , focusing on two critical tasks: Question Answering (QA) and Named Entity Recognition (NER). QA (Pandya and Bhatt, 2021) involves answering questions based on given contexts in various languages; while in NER (Keraghel et al., 2024; Pakhale, 2023), the goal is to identify and classify named entities (e.g., person names, organizations, locations) in text across multiple languages.

[1 https://sigtyp.github.io/st2024-mrl.html](https://sigtyp.github.io/st2024-mrl.html)

Sayontan Ghosh

sayontan.ghosh@gmail.com

## Constantijn van der Poel

constantijn@sandboxquantum.com

With recent advances in the zero-shot and instruction-following capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs), we examined how well existing state-of-the-art models can handle these tasks. More importantly, we also explore whether advanced prompting strategies, which have been shown to significantly boost performance across various natural language and general reasoning benchmarks (Toma et al., 2024; D'Oosterlinck et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Battle and Gollapudi, 2024), could also improve the multilingual performance of these LLMs in low-resource settings. We firstly saw how models perform in a zero-shot setting and if they can handle QA and NER in multiple languages with no task-specific training and continued with prompting techniques applied through DSPy 2 (Khattab et al., 2022, 2023). We also explored whether pivoting through English improves performance for the examined low-resource languages, and, finally, combined these approaches, using DSPy-enhanced prompts with English translation of the input.

The datasets used in this task presented several intriguing challenges that pushed the boundaries of current model capabilities. These include handling dialectal variations, while working with low-resource languages that have limited NLP resources; exploring multi-task learning through the combination of QA and NER tasks; and using complex cultural contexts embedded in the questions and passages. Despite these challenges, these datasets offer a unique opportunity to evaluate the robustness and flexibility of LLMs across diverse languages and tasks, and contribute to the advancement of truly multilingual NLP systems, capable of understanding and processing language in its rich and culturally nuanced forms.

In summary, this work answers the following questions:

[2 https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy)

- How well do state-of-the-art language models perform in multilingual, multi-task setups?
- Can prompting techniques significantly boost performance across languages?
- Is there an advantage to English translation as an intermediate step to multilingual tasks?

Our experiments show that while we were able to achieve very high results in both tasks using zero-shot approaches, there was variability in performance across models, methods, and languages. The complex interactions between model architectures, prompting strategies, and linguistic features suggest that future advancements may require more nuanced, language-specific approaches rather than one-size-fits-all solutions. The effectiveness of translation and advanced prompting techniques varies greatly, requiring careful consideration when applying these methods to different languages and models. Our code can be found at https: //github.com/sandbox-quantum/mrl2024 .

## 2 Related Work

## Multilingual LLMs

Researchers have explored multilingual capabilities of state-of-the-art LLMs through various approaches, using multilingual benchmarks (Zhang et al., 2023), and have worked towards improving multilingual performance through techniques such as cross-lingual prompting (Huang et al., 2023), phonemic transcription integration (Nguyen et al., 2023), and soft prompting with multilingual verbalizers (Li et al., 2023).

In recent works, Marchisio et al. (2024) investigated LLMs' language confusion, introducing the Language Confusion Benchmark (LCB) to evaluate inconsistencies across 15 diverse languages, while Lu et al. (2024) developed LLaMAX, to enhance translation capabilities for over 100 languages through multilingual continual pre-training. Aryabumi et al. (2024) expanded upon the Aya model Üstün et al. (2024) to present Aya 23, which supports 23 languages and expands its capabilities to about half the world's population. Also, Zhao et al. (2024) proposed a three-stage multilingual workflow hypothesis and introduced Parallel Language-specific Neuron Detection (PLND) to identify language-specific neurons. Finally, Hengle et al. (2024) created the MultiLingual Needle in a Haystack test, revealing LLMs' sensitivity to language and position of information in long contexts.

While studies enhanced our understanding of how LLMs process multilingual inputs, they also highlight areas for improvement in multilingual capabilities.

## NMTwith LLMs

The landscape of NMT has been significantly transformed by LLMs. Earlier studies by Robinson et al. (2023) and Zhu et al. (2023) highlighted LLMs' competitiveness with state-of-the-art NMT systems for high-resource languages, while noting limitations in low-resource scenarios. Recently, Enis and Hopkins (2024) showed that Claude 3 Opus demonstrates strong capabilities across resource levels, often surpassing specialized systems. Yan et al. (2024) found that GPT-4's performance is comparable to junior translators but still lags behind more experienced ones, with quality gradually becoming worse from resource-rich to resource-poor language pairs. He et al. (2024) explored mimicking human translation strategies with LLMs, showing that incorporating preparatory steps like keyword and topic analysis can improve translation quality and reduce errors. Adding to this, Hasan et al. (2024) highlighted significant performance disparities between English and low-resource South Asian languages, finding that while GPT-4 consistently outperformed other LLMs, all models showed superior performance in English compared to languages like Bangla, Hindi, and Urdu.

These insights suggest that while LLMs are making significant strides in translation tasks, their performance varies considerably across language pairs and resource levels, showing the potential and current limitations of LLM-based translation.

## Multilingual QA

Multilingual and Cross-lingual QA have emerged as critical areas of NLP research, driven by the advance of LLMs and the creation of diverse multilingual QA datasets. Benchmarks such as TYDI QA(Clark et al., 2020), MLQA (Lewis et al., 2019), XQuAD (Artetxe et al., 2019), and MKQA (Longpre et al., 2021) have been instrumental in enabling evaluation across a wide range of languages, representing different language families and typologies. Most of these multilingual datasets, however, are still limited to evaluation on benchmarking datasets and not yet tested in real-world settings.

Various works have focused on generating synthetic multilingual QA data for training downstream QA models (Riabi et al., 2020; Shakeri et al., 2020). Notable contributions include PAXQA (Li and Callison-Burch, 2023), generating crosslingual QA datasets by leveraging parallel corpora and without requiring annotated non-English QA data. More recently, Engländer et al. (2024) introduced M2QA, a multi-domain multilingual QA benchmark of Indian languages.

For QA, zero-shot transfer learning has been studied extensively; models are typically fine-tuned on English data and then applied directly to other languages, leveraging cross-lingual capabilities of models like mBERT (Devlin, 2018) and XLM-R (Conneau, 2019). CORA (Asai et al., 2020) introduces a unified model for cross-lingual retrieval and multilingual QA, using NMT for data augmentation, either by translating English QA pairs into target languages or by translating non-English queries to English at inference time. Duan et al. (2021) assemble triples from different languages and use a knowledge injection strategy, via link prediction, to enrich a model's multilinguality.

Latest significant contributions include QAMELEON (Agrawal et al., 2023), which uses prompt-tuning to generate synthetic QA data with as few as 5 examples per language. Also, Carrino et al. (2023) focused on the challenging task of the question being in a different language from the context in QA data; they improve cross-lingual QA transfer by utilizing cross-lingual sampling and advanced self-distillation, to enhance a high-performing multilingual model trained on a large-scale dataset, and complemented by a few thousand aligned QA examples across languages.

## Multilingual NER

Recent advancements in multilingual NER have focused on overcoming challenges such as limited annotated data for low-resource languages and performance gaps across languages. Approaches like Retrieval Augmented Generation (Tan et al., 2023), contrastive learning (Mo et al., 2024), and knowledge integration (Fetahu et al., 2023) have shown promising results. The U-RaNER system (Tan et al., 2023) leverages external knowledge sources and multiple retrieval strategies, while MCL-NER (Mo et al., 2024) employs multi-view contrastive learning to align cross-lingual representations. Data augmentation techniques, including translation (Wu et al., 2020a) and code-switching

(Mo et al., 2024), have been used to create synthetic training data for low-resource languages. Selftraining on unlabeled target language data has also proven effective (Wu et al., 2020b; Mo et al., 2024).

Transformer-based models with knowledge integration consistently perform well, with domain adaptation appearing more important than language adaptation (Fetahu et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2023; Paul Balluff and Waldherr, 2024; Kulkarni et al., 2023). A MultiCoNER 3 system by Fetahu et al. (2023) highlighted the effectiveness of ensemble strategies and external knowledge for handling complex entity types. Kulkarni et al. (2023) showed that when including domain-specific adaptations, a unified model can perform close to multiple monolingual models with fewer parameters. Mayhew et al. (2023) introduced UNER, goldstandard NER benchmarks across languages.

Despite these advancements, fine-grained entity types and noisy input data remain significant challenges. With top systems achieving F1 scores above 85%, in benchmarks like XTREME (Siddhant et al., 2020) and UNER (Mayhew et al., 2023), there is still room for improvement in lowresource languages, noisy text scenarios, and finegrained entity recognition.

## 3 Datasets

Our study utilized datasets provided by the MRL 2024 Shared Task, found in the XTREME-UP repository 4 , covering a wide range of topics, like history, science, technology, and local culture. Example snippets are given in Appendix A.1.

## Languages

The datasets cover five languages, representing a diverse range of Language families 5 and resource availability. This selection includes both high- and low-resource languages, allowing for a comprehensive evaluation of multilingual capabilities:

- Igbo ( IG ) (Niger-Congo family)
- Swiss German / Alemannic German ( ALS ) (Germanic family)
- Turkish ( TR ) (Turkic family)
- Azerbaijani ( AZ ) (Turkic family)
- Yoruba ( YO ) (Niger-Congo family)

[3 https://multiconer.github.io/](https://multiconer.github.io/)

[4 https://github.com/google-research/xtreme-up](https://github.com/google-research/xtreme-up)

[5 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language\_family](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_family)

Table 1: Validation and Test Set Sizes in number of examples.

| Language             |   QA Val Set Size |   QA Test Set Size | NER Val Set Size   |   NER Test Set Size |
|----------------------|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------|---------------------|
| Igbo ( IG )          |               201 |                748 | -                  |               11813 |
| Swiss German ( ALS ) |               201 |                651 | 8893               |               11778 |
| Turkish ( TR )       |               196 |                148 | 7490               |               11889 |
| Azerbaijani ( AZ )   |               201 |                291 | 7902               |                8326 |
| Yoruba ( YO )        |               201 |                673 | 4268               |               11795 |

Due to the recent surge in advanced LLMs and their associated costs, combined with our own time and budget constraints, we chose to focus on a select group of models. We evaluated the following five LLMs, representing different architectures and training approaches:

- gpt-4o (Achiam et al., 2023)
- gpt-4-turbo (Achiam et al., 2023)
- claude-3.5-sonnet 7
- Aya-23-8B 8 (Aryabumi et al., 2024)
- Aya-23-35B 9 (Aryabumi et al., 2024)

We worked towards developing robust solutions for both tasks, using the provided datasets. Our work proposed six different evaluation strategies to assess the models' performance:

- Zero-shot Learning: We test the models' ability to perform NER and QA tasks without any task-specific fine-tuning or examples.
- English Translation: We prompt the model to first translate the input text to English before processing.
- DSPy Chain of Thought (DSPy CoT): We use the DSPy library to implement chainof-thought reasoning, encouraging models to break down their reasoning process into steps.
- DSPy Chain-of-Thought + Translation: Data is translated to English before applying the Chain of Thought approach.
- DSPy ReAct: We apply the Reasoning and Acting (ReAct) approach from DSPy, which combines step-by-step reasoning with simulated actions.
- DSPy ReAct + Translation: Data is translated to English before applying DSPy ReAct.

[7 https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/welcome](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/welcome)

[8 https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/aya-23-8B](https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/aya-23-8B)

[9 https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/ aya-23-35B](https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/aya-23-35B)

## QA Dataset

The QA dataset consists of question-answer pairs along with corresponding text passages in each language. The data is in CSV format with columns for annotation\_id , text , question , answer options (A, B, C, D) , and label . The task is multiple-choice question answering, where systems must select the right answer from four options.

## NER Dataset

The NER dataset consists of text samples in each of the above languages, except IG, annotated with named entities. The data is in CoNLL 6 format, with each token on a separate line. It uses the BIO (Beginning, Inside, Outside) tagging scheme, and three types of entities are annotated:

- PER: Person names

- ORG: Organization names

- LOC: Location names

## Dataset Splits

Data sizes for each task are given in Table 1. For both tasks, the data is divided into two splits:

- Validation set: Used for hyperparameter tuning and preliminary evaluation.
- Test set: Unlabeled data, used for final evaluation and reporting of results.

## 4 Methods

We proposed a systematic approach to evaluate the performance of state-of-the-art LLMs on multilingual QA and NER. We used a variety of prompting strategies to assess and enhance the models' capabilities. This section details our experimental setup, the models used, the evaluation methods and metrics, and the prompting techniques applied.

[6 https://www.clips.uantwerpen.be/conll2003/ ner/](https://www.clips.uantwerpen.be/conll2003/ner/)

Table 2: Model Validation Set Performance Comparison on QA. The best results (% Accuracy) per language are in bold. The rightmost column shows the average across all languages, with the highest performing method for each model in bold. The final row shows average performance across models and methods for each language.

| Model             | QA Method                |   ALS |    YO |    AZ |    IG |    TR | Avg           |
|-------------------|--------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|---------------|
| gpt-4o            | Simple QA                | 94.10 | 94.10 | 98.00 | 98.20 | 96.92 | 96.26 ± 2.03  |
| gpt-4o            | English Translation      | 92.50 | 90.00 | 97.50 | 97.00 | 95.38 | 94.48 ± 3.17  |
| gpt-4o            | DSPy CoT                 | 91.50 | 91.50 | 92.00 | 91.50 | 91.79 | 91.66 ± 0.23  |
| gpt-4o            | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 89.50 | 90.00 | 89.52 | 90.00 | 89.74 | 89.75 ± 0.25  |
| gpt-4o            | DSPy-ReAct               | 91.60 | 88.90 | 94.80 | 96.70 | 96.82 | 93.76 ± 3.44  |
| gpt-4o            | DSPy-ReAct + Translation | 97.04 | 95.50 | 97.00 | 95.02 | 96.92 | 96.30 ± 0.96  |
| gpt-4-turbo       | Simple QA                | 88.20 | 90.10 | 96.63 | 95.50 | 95.18 | 93.12 ± 3.73  |
| gpt-4-turbo       | English Translation      | 97.00 | 93.00 | 99.00 | 96.50 | 96.23 | 96.35 ± 2.16  |
| gpt-4-turbo       | DSPy CoT                 | 96.50 | 97.00 | 98.00 | 98.50 | 97.59 | 97.52 ± 0.79  |
| gpt-4-turbo       | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 97.50 | 99.00 | 98.50 | 96.50 | 96.92 | 97.68 ± 1.05  |
| gpt-4-turbo       | DSPy-ReAct               | 95.50 | 95.00 | 97.50 | 96.50 | 97.44 | 96.39 ± 1.13  |
| gpt-4-turbo       | DSPy-ReAct + Translation | 97.50 | 97.84 | 98.00 | 98.01 | 97.86 | 97.84 ± 0.21  |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | Simple QA                | 92.50 | 94.50 | 99.50 | 93.00 | 96.93 | 95.29 ± 2.92  |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | English Translation      | 95.00 | 96.00 | 94.00 | 94.50 | 94.87 | 94.87 ± 0.74  |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | DSPy CoT                 | 93.00 | 91.50 | 92.00 | 91.00 | 92.82 | 92.06 ± 0.85  |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 92.00 | 92.00 | 94.50 | 95.00 | 96.41 | 93.98 ± 1.94  |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | DSPy-ReAct               | 92.00 | 90.00 | 98.00 | 94.00 | 97.44 | 94.29 ± 3.44  |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | DSPy-ReAct + Translation | 93.00 | 98.50 | 99.00 | 94.50 | 96.93 | 96.39 ± 2.58  |
| Aya-23-8B         | Simple QA                | 42.00 | 59.00 | 43.00 | 28.50 | 57.95 | 46.09 ± 12.68 |
| Aya-23-8B         | English Translation      | 42.50 | 64.00 | 48.00 | 45.50 | 66.67 | 53.33 ± 11.17 |
| Aya-23-8B         | DSPy CoT                 | 95.50 | 92.50 | 92.50 | 92.52 | 93.85 | 93.37 ± 1.32  |
| Aya-23-8B         | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 94.00 | 94.10 | 94.02 | 94.20 | 93.85 | 94.03 ± 0.13  |
| Aya-23-8B         | DSPy-ReAct               | 94.03 | 94.10 | 94.00 | 94.00 | 93.97 | 94.02 ± 0.05  |
| Aya-23-8B         | DSPy-ReAct + Translation | 95.50 | 98.60 | 98.51 | 98.52 | 97.89 | 97.80 ± 1.32  |
| Aya-23-35B        | Simple QA                | 59.50 | 58.50 | 74.50 | 65.50 | 68.11 | 65.22 ± 6.57  |
| Aya-23-35B        | English Translation      | 62.50 | 56.50 | 73.00 | 64.00 | 81.54 | 67.51 ± 9.82  |
| Aya-23-35B        | DSPy CoT                 | 98.50 | 98.40 | 98.51 | 97.00 | 92.31 | 96.94 ± 2.67  |
| Aya-23-35B        | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 94.00 | 94.02 | 94.00 | 94.10 | 93.85 | 93.99 ± 0.09  |
| Aya-23-35B        | DSPy-ReAct               | 94.00 | 97.00 | 98.51 | 98.50 | 98.46 | 97.29 ± 1.95  |
| Aya-23-35B        | DSPy-ReAct + Translation | 98.00 | 98.50 | 98.50 | 97.00 | 92.31 | 96.86 ± 2.62  |
| Average           | Average                  | 88.53 | 89.66 | 91.35 | 89.38 | 91.83 | 90.15 ± 13.70 |

DSPy (Khattab et al., 2022, 2023) represents a paradigm shift in prompt engineering, moving towards a more algorithmic and systematic approach. Its power lies in its optimizers, that automatically refine prompts or adjust model weights to improve performance on a given metric. It optimizes each component for different models. However, this library and the optimizations provided have not been extensively tested on multilingual tasks.

DSPy ChainOfThought enhances a task's inputoutput structure by incorporating a reasoning step. It adds a 'rationale' component between the input and final output, allowing the LLM to articulate its thought process. This helps break down complex problems into more manageable steps, potentially improving problem-solving and making the model's reasoning more transparent. DSPy ReAct, on the other hand, implements the Reasoning and Acting approach. This module alternates between thinking steps and concrete actions, such as retrieving information or using external tools. ReAct offers a structured method for combining analytical steps with practical actions or API calls, and enables more sophisticated problem-solving that can integrate external data or resources.

For each model and evaluation strategy, we followed these steps (a flowchart of the process can be found in Appendix A.3):

1. Data Preparation: We preprocessed the dataset for each file and language, ensuring consistent formatting across all inputs.
2. Prompt Engineering: We designed prompts for each task and strategy.
3. Model Inference: We ran each model on the prepared data using the appropriate prompts, incorporating DSPy techniques where applicable.
4. Output Processing: We post-processed the model outputs.
5. Evaluation: We computed the following performance metrics for each task:
- For QA: Accuracy
- For NER: Precision, Recall, F1 score
6. Cross-lingual Analysis: We compared performance across different languages to assess each model's multilingual capabilities.
7. Cross-model and methods Comparison: We analyzed how different model architectures and methods perform relative to each other across tasks and languages.

Table 3: Named Entity Recognition (NER) Validation Results: Precision (P), Recall (R), and F1 Scores. Best results per language and model are in bold. The rightmost column shows the average F1 score across all languages.

|                   | NER Method               | ALS   | ALS   | ALS   | YO    | YO    | YO    |       |       |       | TR    | TR    | TR    | Avg   |
|-------------------|--------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| Model             | NER Method               | P     | R     | F1    | P     | R     | F1    | P     | AZ R  | F1    | P     | R     | F1    | F1    |
| gpt-4o            | Simple NER               | 94.10 | 94.10 | 92.01 | 90.66 | 91.55 | 90.57 | 89.61 | 90.41 | 89.25 | 92.27 | 92.56 | 92.23 | 91.02 |
|                   | English Translation      | 92.15 | 92.60 | 91.90 | 91.31 | 91.77 | 91.04 | 89.40 | 89.67 | 88.50 | 91.43 | 90.95 | 90.56 | 90.50 |
|                   | DSPy CoT                 | 88.73 | 90.34 | 88.32 | 91.94 | 92.44 | 91.32 | 91.18 | 92.13 | 90.70 | 87.90 | 89.15 | 86.88 | 89.31 |
|                   | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 87.04 | 88.11 | 83.59 | 86.74 | 88.62 | 85.69 | 87.28 | 89.89 | 86.05 | 85.21 | 87.32 | 82.63 | 84.49 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct               | 88.73 | 90.34 | 88.32 | 91.94 | 92.44 | 91.32 | 91.19 | 92.10 | 90.71 | 87.99 | 89.15 | 86.80 | 89.29 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct + Translation | 87.04 | 88.11 | 83.59 | 86.74 | 88.62 | 85.69 | 87.28 | 89.89 | 86.05 | 85.21 | 87.32 | 82.63 | 84.49 |
| gpt-4-turbo       | Simple NER               | 88.95 | 90.43 | 87.88 | 86.59 | 88.62 | 85.91 | 86.46 | 87.89 | 84.62 | 86.46 | 87.89 | 84.62 | 85.76 |
| gpt-4-turbo       | English Translation      | 90.06 | 90.85 | 89.78 | 90.07 | 90.86 | 89.78 | 88.15 | 89.07 | 87.30 | 88.85 | 89.30 | 87.96 | 88.71 |
|                   | DSPy CoT                 | 85.91 | 88.58 | 85.26 | 90.02 | 91.62 | 90.32 | 89.32 | 90.80 | 88.10 | 85.70 | 87.93 | 84.19 | 86.97 |
|                   | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 88.57 | 90.04 | 85.97 | 85.60 | 87.81 | 82.83 | 84.24 | 86.75 | 81.29 | 86.87 | 88.14 | 84.80 | 83.72 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct               | 85.91 | 88.58 | 85.26 | 90.02 | 91.62 | 90.33 | 89.30 | 90.78 | 88.11 | 85.70 | 87.93 | 84.19 | 86.97 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct + Translation | 85.60 | 87.81 | 82.83 | 86.87 | 88.14 | 84.80 | 88.57 | 90.04 | 85.97 | 84.24 | 86.75 | 81.29 | 83.72 |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | Simple NER               | 94.02 | 94.18 | 93.85 | 93.05 | 92.29 | 92.61 | 94.02 | 94.18 | 93.85 | 89.60 | 90.10 | 89.07 | 92.35 |
| claude-3.5-sonnet | English Translation      | 86.93 | 88.68 | 85.25 | 87.12 | 90.28 | 87.89 | 90.92 | 91.51 | 89.28 | 88.09 | 88.65 | 85.60 | 87.01 |
|                   | DSPy CoT                 | 92.30 | 92.68 | 92.68 | 93.59 | 92.96 | 93.21 | 94.40 | 94.48 | 94.18 | 89.23 | 89.85 | 88.71 | 92.20 |
|                   | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 86.51 | 88.60 | 85.04 | 88.78 | 89.65 | 87.98 | 87.06 | 89.96 | 86.43 | 86.29 | 87.56 | 83.38 | 85.71 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct               | 87.98 | 89.41 | 87.62 | 91.05 | 90.66 | 90.70 | 96.27 | 95.31 | 95.31 | 89.02 | 89.54 | 88.29 | 90.48 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct + Translation | 87.41 | 89.26 | 86.66 | 89.10 | 89.60 | 89.03 | 90.27 | 91.21 | 89.11 | 87.14 | 88.02 | 84.48 | 87.32 |
| Aya-23-8B         | Simple NER               | 80.36 | 89.65 | 84.75 | 76.33 | 87.37 | 81.47 | 74.82 | 86.50 | 80.23 | 72.13 | 84.93 | 78.01 | 81.12 |
| Aya-23-8B         | English Translation      | 80.36 | 89.65 | 84.75 | 74.82 | 86.50 | 80.23 | 72.13 | 84.93 | 78.01 | 76.33 | 87.37 | 81.47 | 81.12 |
|                   | DSPy CoT                 | 85.14 | 87.60 | 84.43 | 79.30 | 83.72 | 79.42 | 86.19 | 89.13 | 86.35 | 80.12 | 86.17 | 80.90 | 82.78 |
|                   | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 84.76 | 87.73 | 84.49 | 78.82 | 83.60 | 79.44 | 86.45 | 89.18 | 86.58 | 80.72 | 86.23 | 81.15 | 82.92 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct               | 85.19 | 87.61 | 84.28 | 79.30 | 83.63 | 79.34 | 86.51 | 88.87 | 86.26 | 80.24 | 86.25 | 81.07 | 82.74 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct + Translation | 85.17 | 87.85 | 84.57 | 79.26 | 83.68 | 79.70 | 85.22 | 88.96 | 85.73 | 80.86 | 86.25 | 81.20 | 82.80 |
| Aya-23-35B        | Simple NER               | 76.33 | 87.37 | 81.47 | 72.13 | 84.93 | 78.01 | 80.36 | 89.65 | 84.75 | 74.82 | 86.50 | 80.23 | 81.12 |
|                   | English Translation      | 76.33 | 87.37 | 81.47 | 72.13 | 84.93 | 78.01 | 80.36 | 89.65 | 84.75 | 74.82 | 86.49 | 80.23 | 81.12 |
|                   | DSPy CoT                 | 76.32 | 87.36 | 81.47 | 72.12 | 84.92 | 78.00 | 80.36 | 89.64 | 84.75 | 74.81 | 86.45 | 80.23 | 81.11 |
|                   | DSPy CoT + Translation   | 84.98 | 87.79 | 84.92 | 82.58 | 84.68 | 82.69 | 85.15 | 88.87 | 85.86 | 79.84 | 85.66 | 80.88 | 83.59 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct               | 86.29 | 88.14 | 84.93 | 83.45 | 84.80 | 82.92 | 86.74 | 89.49 | 85.73 | 82.04 | 86.21 | 81.15 | 83.68 |
|                   | DSPy ReAct + Translation | 83.69 | 87.55 | 83.70 | 82.70 | 84.73 | 82.77 | 84.08 | 88.52 | 85.32 | 78.86 | 85.98 | 80.56 | 83.09 |
| Average           |                          | 86.17 | 89.25 | 86.20 | 84.88 | 88.07 | 85.37 | 86.78 | 89.75 | 86.94 | 83.71 | 87.86 | 84.24 | 85.69 |

We used the official APIs for OpenAI's GPT4 10 and Anthropic's claude models 11 , and Ollama versions for the aya Language Models 12 , namely aya:8b as the 8B version, and aya:35b-23-q2\_K as the quantized 35B version. For DSPy, we used the DSPy library 13 , and specifically dspy-Chain-ofThought 14 and dspy-ReAct 15 . Our prompts for all experiments are provided in Appendix A.2.

All experiments were ran on an AWS g5.8xlarge instance, with 32 vCPUs, 128 GiB in memory and an NVIDIA A10G GPU. We initially explored temperature values in the range of [0,1] for OpenAI and Anthropic models, using a fixed seed. Our preliminary tests revealed negligible variation in model outputs across this temperature range. Consequently, we standardized the temperature value to 0 for all subsequent experiments to ensure consistency and reproducibility of results.

[10 https://openai.com/index/openai-api/](https://openai.com/index/openai-api/)

[11 https://www.anthropic.com/api](https://www.anthropic.com/api)

[12 https://ollama.com/library/aya](https://ollama.com/library/aya)

[13 https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/)

[14 https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/api/modules/ ChainOfThought](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/api/modules/ChainOfThought)

[15 https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/api/modules/ ReAct](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/api/modules/ReAct)

GPT-4o in a simple zero-shot setup was used to create predictions for the competition submissions, for both QA and NER.

## 5 Results &amp; Discussion

Results for QA and NER are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Figures showing accuracy for our best performing models in both tasks are provided in Appendix A.4 Tables 4 and 5 in the Appendix A.5 provide information on model performance compared to baseline Simple QA or NER averaged across languages.

## QA

Our analysis of multilingual QA revealed important insights. Baseline differences were seen in model performance across languages, with AZ, TR and IG tending to show higher scores than YO or ALS. On average, GPT-4-turbo and GPT-4o tended to outperform other models, particularly in zeroshot settings. DSPy-enhanced prompts boosted performance for all models, and especially for the open source Aya models. Both the 8B and 35B parameter Aya models showed comparable average performance to the other models with the use of DSPy-ReAct with English Translation, with accuracies of 97.80% and 96.86%, respectively. In fact,

DSPy ReAct with English translation showed the highest average improvements over Simple QA across four out of the five languages , with improvements ranging from an average of 16.10% for TR to 27.83% for ALS.

Despite comparable average performances across models with DSPy prompting, the effect of prompting varied significantly when stratified by individual languages and model. For GPT-4turbo, DSPy CoT improved scores by an average of 4 . 72% across languages, with notable improvements in YO (from 90 . 10% to 97 . 00% ) and ALS (from 88 . 20% to 96 . 50% ). In contrast, DSPy CoT decreased Claude-3.5-sonnet's performance by an average of 4 . 62% , with the most significant drop in AZ ( 99 . 50% to 92 . 00% ). Interestingly, GPT-4o saw a decrease in performance using DsPy CoT, as well as DSPy ReAct and DsPy CoT with English Translation compared to simple QA, but saw a 1 . 11% improvement when using ReAct with English translation.

We further examined the impact of translating text to English before processing. Translation alone tended to maintain or improve performance compared to simple QA, with the largest average improvements of 4.72% occurring for the TR language. Again, when looking at individual models and languages, English translation had varying effects. Translation improved performance for GPT-4-turbo in simple QA tasks by an average of 3 . 46% , with the most significant improvement in ALS ( 88 . 20% to 97 . 00% ). Claude-3.5-sonnet showed mixed results with translation alone, experiencing a slight average decrease of 0 . 91% compared to simple QA. Combining DSPy CoT with Translation only improved performance compared to CoT alone. However, adding Translation to DSPy ReAct boosted performance across all languages, except TR. YO saw the largest average gains in accuracy of 5.15% with DSPy ReAct + Translation compared to DSPy ReAct alone.

Our results additionally revealed a nuanced relationship between model size and performance; raw parameter count isn't the sole determinant of multilingual and multi-task capabilities. The Aya models lagged significantly behind in simple QA, yet showed a clear performance increase from 8B to 35B parameters, with average simple QA improvements of 15 . 32% across languages. On average, prompting methods and pivoting through English translations tended to significantly improve the performance of these smaller open source models. The most dramatic improvement was seen in AZ, where performance increased from 28 . 50% with Simple QA to 98 . 50% with DSPyReAct + Translation for the Aya-23-8B model. Additionally, while Claude-3.5-sonnet and GPT4-turbo often showed strong performance, the Aya models, which are assumed to be much smaller, were able to match or outperform these models with some DSPy prompting approaches.

Models that excelled in simple QA performed relatively well across all prompting strategies. However, the improvements from advanced techniques were not uniform, indicating that the choice of QA method should be tailored to the specific language and model combination for optimal results.

## NER

Our results on multilingual NER across five models and four languages reveal distinct patterns in LLMs' multilingual processing capabilities (3). Models tended to perform better on ALS (86.20% average microF1) and AZ (86.94%) compared to YO (85.37%) and TR (84.24%) on NER, whereas models tended to show higher accuracy for TR and AZ in QA, as previously described.

GPT-4o and Claude-3.5-sonnet consistently outperformed other models in simple NER. GPT-4o achieved an average F1 score of 91 . 02% across all languages, with its best performance in ALS ( 92 . 01% ) and TR ( 92 . 23% ). Claude-3.5-sonnet averaged 92 . 35% , showing particularly strong results in ALS and AZ (both 93 . 85% ). This performance surpassed that of GPT-4-turbo ( 85 . 76% average F1) and both Aya models ( 81 . 12% average F1).

Unlike QA, model size did not directly correlate with performance for NER . The difference in performance between Aya-23-35B and Aya-23-8B was minimal in simple NER tasks, with the smaller model showing comparable or better performance for some languages. For example, in ALS, Aya23-8B had an average F1 score of 84 . 75% versus 81 . 47% for Aya-23-35B.

A dvanced prompting techniques were also less effective in improving average performance for NER. GPT-4o saw a slight average decrease of 1 . 59% in F1 score with DSPy CoT across all languages, with the most significant drop in ALS ( 92 . 01% to 88 . 32% ). In contrast, Claude-3.5sonnet benefited from DSPy CoT, with an average increase of 0 . 38% in F1 score.

For DSPy ReAct, GPT-4-turbo showed mixed results, with an average improvement of 0 . 95% and particularly effective in YO ( 85 . 91% to 90 . 33% ).

The Aya models, saw more consistent improvements with DSPy techniques, with Aya-23-35B achieving an average F1 score increase of 2 . 62% using DSPy ReAct. For Claude-3.5-sonnet, DSPy ReAct improved performance on AZ by 1 . 46% but led to a 6 . 23% decrease in ALS. Similarly, GPT-4turbo saw a 4 . 42% improvement in YO with DSPy ReAct but a 2 . 62% decline in ALS.

Translating input to English also tended to hurt performance, even when combined with DSPy prompting approaches. GPT-4-turbo saw an average improvement of 2 . 34% , with significant gains in YO ( 85 . 91% to 89 . 78% ) but .PT-4o showed an average decrease of 0 . 96% in F1 score with translation across all languages. Claude-3.5-sonnet also experienced performance drops, with an average decrease of 4 . 45% in F1 score, most notable in ALS ( 93 . 85% to 85 . 25% ).

## Discussion

Our analysis of QA and NER tasks across multiple languages reveals differences in how LLMs perform on these tasks. GPT-4o, GPT-4-turbo, and Claude-3.5-sonnet showed the best performance on QAbut GPT-4-turbo lagged behind in NER, though still outperforming the Aya models.

The impact of advanced techniques differed between tasks. DSPy-enhanced prompts generally improved QA performance, particularly for the Aya models. However, in NER, the impact was more varied, with fewer models and languages showing improvements. Translation effects also diverged; in QA, they varied widely with GPT-4-turbo often improving, while in NER, translation generally led to decreased performance, especially for GPT-4o and Claude-3.5-sonnet.

Language difficulty patterns also differed between tasks. In QA, AZ and TR had higher scores, while in NER, ALS and AZ outperformed YO and TR. This suggests that language difficulty can vary between tasks, with performance differences generally more pronounced in NER. Model selection also affected capabilities on different languages, with Claude-3.5-sonnet showed consistent performance across languages, while GPT-4 models had more variability.

Our findings highlight the importance of taskspecific optimization in multilingual NLP. Techniques that boost performance in one task may be less effective in another, and models may show different linguistic competencies across tasks.

## 6 Conclusions

Our work on multilingual QA and NER and the variability in results across languages and tasks indicates that no single approach served as a universal solution across all scenarios.

The effectiveness of techniques like DSPy and translation varied between models and tasks. We challenged the assumption that larger models always perform better, suggesting that factors such as model architecture and prompt development play a significant role. Our results show that models specifically designed for multilingual tasks did not consistently outperform general-purpose LLMs, suggesting that specialized architectures may not be necessary for effective multilingual processing. A key advantage of our approach is achieving high scores (often above 95% for QA and 90% for NER) with minimal system building. This shows the potential for efficient, yet highly effective multilingual NLP systems through simple utilization of pretrained models.

Our research also suggests the potential of using open-source LLMs beyond the Aya models, including LLama 3 16 , Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2023, 2024), and Gemma 2 (Team et al., 2024). These models, which have often demonstrated performance comparable to closed-source alternatives, may facilitate new research and practical applications for working with limited resources in future studies.

Other future research may focus on approaches that better handle the diverse requirements of different languages and tasks. These efforts, combined with the use of language specific datasets, or texts in languages of related language families to the languages we examine, for model finetuning, will be crucial in building truly effective and resourceefficient systems.

[16 https://llama.meta.com/](https://llama.meta.com/)

## References

- Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .
- Priyanka Agrawal, Chris Alberti, Fantine Huot, Joshua Maynez, Ji Ma, Sebastian Ruder, Kuzman Ganchev, Dipanjan Das, and Mirella Lapata. 2023. Qameleon: Multilingual qa with only 5 examples. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 11:1754-1771.
- Mikel Artetxe, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama. 2019. On the cross-lingual transferability of monolingual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11856 .
- Viraat Aryabumi, John Dang, Dwarak Talupuru, Saurabh Dash, David Cairuz, Hangyu Lin, Bharat Venkitesh, Madeline Smith, Kelly Marchisio, Sebastian Ruder, et al. 2024. Aya 23: Open weight releases to further multilingual progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15032 .
- Akari Asai, Jungo Kasai, Jonathan H Clark, Kenton Lee, Eunsol Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2020. Xor qa: Cross-lingual open-retrieval question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11856 .
- Rick Battle and Teja Gollapudi. 2024. The unreasonable effectiveness of eccentric automatic prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10949 .
- Casimiro Pio Carrino, Carlos Escolano, and José AR Fonollosa. 2023. Promoting generalized crosslingual question answering in few-resource scenarios via self-knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17134 .
- Jonathan H Clark, Eunsol Choi, Michael Collins, Dan Garrette, Tom Kwiatkowski, Vitaly Nikolaev, and Jennimaria Palomaki. 2020. Tydi qa: A benchmark for information-seeking question answering in ty pologically di verse languages. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:454-470.
- A Conneau. 2019. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116 .
- [Jacob Devlin. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805)
- Karel D'Oosterlinck, Omar Khattab, François Remy, Thomas Demeester, Chris Develder, and Christopher Potts. 2024. In-context learning for extreme multi-label classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12178 .
- Zhichao Duan, Xiuxing Li, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhenyu Li, Ning Liu, and Jianyong Wang. 2021. Bridging the language gap: Knowledge injected multilingual
- question answering. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Knowledge (ICBK) , pages 339346. IEEE.
- Adel Elmahdy, Sheng-Chieh Lin, and Amin Ahmad. 2024. Synergistic approach for simultaneous optimization of monolingual, cross-lingual, and multilingual information retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10536 .
- Leon Engländer, Hannah Sterz, Clifton Poth, Jonas Pfeiffer, Ilia Kuznetsov, and Iryna Gurevych. 2024. M2qa: Multi-domain multilingual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01091 .
- Maxim Enis and Mark Hopkins. 2024. From llm to nmt: Advancing low-resource machine translation with claude. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13813 .
- Besnik Fetahu, Sudipta Kar, Zhiyu Chen, Oleg Rokhlenko, and Shervin Malmasi. 2023. Semeval2023 task 2: Fine-grained multilingual named entity recognition (multiconer 2). arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06586 .
- Ping Guo, Yubing Ren, Yue Hu, Yanan Cao, Yunpeng Li, and Heyan Huang. 2024. Steering large language models for cross-lingual information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 585-596.
- MdArid Hasan, Prerona Tarannum, Krishno Dey, Imran Razzak, and Usman Naseem. 2024. Do large language models speak all languages equally? a comparative study in low-resource settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02237 .
- Zhiwei He, Tian Liang, Wenxiang Jiao, Zhuosheng Zhang, Yujiu Yang, Rui Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Shuming Shi, and Xing Wang. 2024. Exploring humanlike translation strategy with large language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:229-246.
- Amey Hengle, Prasoon Bajpai, Soham Dan, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2024. Multilingual needle in a haystack: Investigating long-context behavior of multilingual large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10151 .
- Xiyang Hu, Xinchi Chen, Peng Qi, Deguang Kong, Kunlun Liu, William Yang Wang, and Zhiheng Huang. 2023. Language agnostic multilingual information retrieval with contrastive learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 9133-9146, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Haoyang Huang, Tianyi Tang, Dongdong Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Ting Song, Yan Xia, and Furu Wei. 2023. Not all languages are created equal in llms: Improving multilingual capability by cross-lingual-thought prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07004 .
- Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. Preprint , arXiv:2310.06825.
- Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, MarieAnne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2024. Mixtral of experts. Preprint , arXiv:2401.04088.
- Imed Keraghel, Stanislas Morbieu, and Mohamed Nadif. 2024. A survey on recent advances in named entity recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10825 .
- Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. 2022. Demonstrate-searchpredict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14024 .
- Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, et al. 2023. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714 .
- Mayank Kulkarni, Daniel Preotiuc-Pietro, Karthik Radhakrishnan, Genta Indra Winata, Shijie Wu, Lingjue Xie, and Shaohua Yang. 2023. Towards a unified multi-domain multilingual named entity recognition model. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2210-2219, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Patrick Lewis, Barlas O˘ guz, Ruty Rinott, Sebastian Riedel, and Holger Schwenk. 2019. Mlqa: Evaluating cross-lingual extractive question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07475 .
- Bryan Li and Chris Callison-Burch. 2023. Paxqa: Generating cross-lingual question answering examples at training scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12206 .
- Shuang Li, Xuming Hu, Aiwei Liu, Yawen Yang, Fukun Ma, Philip S Yu, and Lijie Wen. 2023. Enhancing cross-lingual natural language inference by soft prompting with multilingual verbalizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12761 .
- [Shayne Longpre, Yi Lu, and Joachim Daiber. 2021. Mkqa: A linguistically diverse benchmark for multilingual open domain question answering. Transac-](https://direct.mit.edu/tacl/article/doi/10.1162/tacl_a_00433/108607/MKQA-A-Linguistically-Diverse-Benchmark-for)
- tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 9:1389-1406.
- Yinquan Lu, Wenhao Zhu, Lei Li, Yu Qiao, and Fei Yuan. 2024. Llamax: Scaling linguistic horizons of llm by enhancing translation capabilities beyond 100 languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05975 .
- Kelly Marchisio, Wei-Yin Ko, Alexandre Bérard, Théo Dehaze, and Sebastian Ruder. 2024. Understanding and mitigating language confusion in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.20052 .
- Stephen Mayhew, Terra Blevins, Shuheng Liu, Marek Šuppa, Hila Gonen, Joseph Marvin Imperial, Börje F Karlsson, Peiqin Lin, Nikola Ljubeši´ c, Lester James Miranda, et al. 2023. Universal ner: A gold-standard multilingual named entity recognition benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09122 .
- Ying Mo, Jian Yang, Jiahao Liu, Qifan Wang, Ruoyu Chen, Jingang Wang, and Zhoujun Li. 2024. mcl-ner: Cross-lingual named entity recognition via multi-view contrastive learning. Preprint , arXiv:2308.09073.
- Hoang H Nguyen, Chenwei Zhang, Tao Zhang, Eugene Rohrbaugh, and Philip S Yu. 2023. Enhancing cross-lingual transfer via phonemic transcription integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04361 .
- [Kalyani Pakhale. 2023. Comprehensive overview of named entity recognition: Models, domainspecific applications and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14084 .](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14084)
- Hariom A Pandya and Brijesh S Bhatt. 2021. Question answering survey: Directions, challenges, datasets, evaluation matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03572 .
- Hajo G. Boomgaarden Paul Balluff and Annie Waldherr. 2024. Automatically finding actors in texts: A performance review of multilingual named entity recognition tools. Communication Methods and Measures , 0(0):1-19.
- Arij Riabi, Thomas Scialom, Rachel Keraron, Benoît Sagot, Djamé Seddah, and Jacopo Staiano. 2020. Synthetic data augmentation for zero-shot crosslingual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12643 .
- Nathaniel Robinson, Perez Ogayo, David R. Mortensen, and Graham Neubig. 2023. ChatGPT MT: Competitive for high- (but not low-) resource languages. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Machine Translation , pages 392-418, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Siamak Shakeri, Noah Constant, Mihir Sanjay Kale, and Linting Xue. 2020. Towards zero-shot multilingual synthetic question and answer generation for cross-lingual reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12008 .
- Zhengliang Shi, Shuo Zhang, Weiwei Sun, Shen Gao, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, and Zhaochun Ren. 2024. Generate-then-ground in retrieval-augmented generation for multi-hop question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14891 .
- Aditya Siddhant, Junjie Hu, Melvin Johnson, Orhan Firat, and Sebastian Ruder. 2020. Xtreme: A massively multilingual multi-task benchmark for evaluating cross-lingual generalization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning 2020 , pages 4411-4421.
- Zeqi Tan, Shen Huang, Zixia Jia, Jiong Cai, Yinghui Li, Weiming Lu, Yueting Zhuang, Kewei Tu, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, et al. 2023. Damo-nlp at semeval2023 task 2: A unified retrieval-augmented system for multilingual named entity recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03688 .
- Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. 2024. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118 .
- Augustin Toma, Ronald Xie, Steven Palayew, Patrick R Lawler, and Bo Wang. 2024. Wanglab at mediqacorr 2024: Optimized llm-based programs for medical error detection and correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14544 .
- Ahmet Üstün, Viraat Aryabumi, Zheng-Xin Yong, WeiYin Ko, Daniel D'souza, Gbemileke Onilude, Neel Bhandari, Shivalika Singh, Hui-Lee Ooi, Amr Kayid, et al. 2024. Aya model: An instruction finetuned open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07827 .
- Qianhui Wu, Zijia Lin, Börje F Karlsson, Biqing Huang, and Jian-Guang Lou. 2020a. Unitrans: Unifying model transfer and data transfer for cross-lingual named entity recognition with unlabeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07683 .
- Qianhui Wu, Zijia Lin, Börje F Karlsson, Jian-Guang Lou, and Biqing Huang. 2020b. Single-/multi-source cross-lingual ner via teacher-student learning on unlabeled data in target language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12440 .
- Jianhao Yan, Pingchuan Yan, Yulong Chen, Judy Li, Xianchao Zhu, and Yue Zhang. 2024. Gpt-4 vs. human translators: A comprehensive evaluation of translation quality across languages, domains, and expertise levels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03658 .
- Eugene Yang, Thomas Jänich, James Mayfield, and Dawn Lawrie. 2024a. Language fairness in multilingual information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR '24, page 2487-2491, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
- Eugene Yang, Dawn Lawrie, and James Mayfield. 2024b. Distillation for multilingual information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 2368-2373.
- Wenxuan Zhang, Mahani Aljunied, Chang Gao, Yew Ken Chia, and Lidong Bing. 2023. M3exam: A multilingual, multimodal, multilevel benchmark for examining large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:5484-5505.
- Yiran Zhao, Wenxuan Zhang, Guizhen Chen, Kenji Kawaguchi, and Lidong Bing. 2024. How do large language models handle multilingualism? arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18815 .
- Wenhao Zhu, Hongyi Liu, Qingxiu Dong, Jingjing Xu, Shujian Huang, Lingpeng Kong, Jiajun Chen, and Lei Li. 2023. Multilingual machine translation with large language models: Empirical results and analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04675 .

## A Appendix

## A.1 Dataset examples NER :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## QA :

annotation\_id,text,question,A,B,C,D,label 34920690,Di Messenischi Chrieg bizachnet meriri Chrieg wo i de Antiki stattgfunde hend und zo de Underwerffig vo Messenie dör d Spartaner gfüert hend. Datierig und d Aazaal vo de Chrieg isch i de Antiki und i de moderne Forschig nöd aihaitlich.,Ih wellere Ziitperiode hend di Messenische Chrieg stattgfunde?,

Ih de Antiki. ,Ih Messenie.,

Ih Sparta.,Im

Mittelalter.,A

36318343,"De Pausanias datiert di Messenische Chrieg ufs Joor gnau ahand vo de Olympiade. Doch werd hütt agnoo, as sini Daate öppe vierzg Joor z früüe sind.",Wie gross isch de unterschied zwüschet de date vom Pausanias und dem was hüt agnoh wird?,De Pausanius het sich bide Date um eppe 40 Jahr gege unde vertueh.,Gar kein Unterschied,Genau richtig.,Zwänzg Johr. ,A

## A.2 Prompts

- QA prompt:

"For each of the examples given, read the text and question. Choose the best answer from the options A, B, C, or D provided below. Respond with ONLY the letter (A, B, C, or D) of the correct answer. If the text does not contain the exact information to answer the question, pick the answer closer to the truth. If none of the answers are a good pick, if there are answers or options missing or if you cannot make a decision, pick a letter from A, B, C, D at random."

- ·
- ·

For each of the examples given, read the text and question. Choose the best answer from spond with ONLY the letter (A, B, C, or D) of the correct answer. If the text does not contain pick the answer closer to the truth. If none of the answers are a good pick, if there are answers or options missing or if you cannot make a decision, pick a letter from A, B, C, D at random."

- English Translation prompt: "Translate the following text to English:"
- QA with English translation prompt: "Translate the following text to English: the options A, B, C, or D provided below. Rethe exact information to answer the question,

## · NER prompt:

"Extract named entities from the text using ONLY the following tags, where

B- indicates Beginning /

I- indicates Inside the word

B-/I-PER: Person, B-/I-ORG: Organization,

B-/I-LOC: Location, O: Non-entity

Provide each entity and its tag in the format 'Entity (TAG)'. Give a tag for every word in the text."

- NER with English translation prompt:

"Translate the following text to English: Extract named entities from the text using ONLY the following tags, where

B- indicates Beginning /

- I- indicates Inside the word B-/I-PER: Person, B-/I-ORG: Organization, B-/I-LOC: Location, O: Non-entity

Provide each entity and its tag in the format 'Entity (TAG)'. Give a tag for every word in the text."

## A.3 Method flowchart

Figure 1: Method Flowchart

<!-- image -->

## A.4 QA and NER performance

<!-- image -->

|                                                                                              | gpt-4o                                                                                       | gpt-4o + T                                                                                   | gpt-4o DSPy CoT                                                                              |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                              | gpt-4o DSPy CoT + T                                                                          | gpt-4o DSPy ReAct                                                                            | gpt-4o DSPy ReAct + T                                                                        |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|                                                                                              | gpt-4-turbo                                                                                  | gpt-4-turbo + T                                                                              | gpt-4-turbo DSPy CoT                                                                         |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|                                                                                              | gpt-4-turbo DSPy CoT + T                                                                     | gpt-4-turbo DSPy ReAct                                                                       | gpt-4-turbo DSPy ReAct + T                                                                   |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|                                                                                              | claude-3.5-sonnet                                                                            | claude-3.5-sonnet + T                                                                        | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT                                                                   |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
| claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T |

## QA Performance: gpt-4o vs gpt-4-turbo vs claude-3.5-sonnet

Figure 2: Comparison of QA performance (Accuracy %) between the three best performing models, gpt-4o, gpt-4-turbo, and claude-3.5-sonnet, across all languages and methods. + T indicates the + Translation experiment.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

|                                                                                              | gpt-4o                                                                                       | gpt-4o + T                                                                                   | gpt-4o DSPy CoT                                                                              |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                              | gpt-4o DSPy CoT + T                                                                          | gpt-4o DSPy ReAct                                                                            | gpt-4o DSPy ReAct + T                                                                        |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|                                                                                              | gpt-4-turbo                                                                                  | gpt-4-turbo + T                                                                              | gpt-4-turbo DSPy CoT                                                                         |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|                                                                                              | gpt-4-turbo DSPy CoT + T                                                                     | gpt-4-turbo DSPy ReAct                                                                       | gpt-4-turbo DSPy ReAct + T                                                                   |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
|                                                                                              | claude-3.5-sonnet                                                                            | claude-3.5-sonnet + T                                                                        | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT                                                                   |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |
| claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T | claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy CoT + T claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct claude-3.5-sonnet DSPy ReAct + T |

## NER Performance: gpt-4o vs gpt-4-turbo vs claude-3.5-sonnet

Figure 3: Comparison of NER performance (F1 score) between the three best performing models, gpt-4o, gpt-4-turbo, and claude-3.5-sonnet, across all languages and methods. + T indicates the + Translation experiment.

<!-- image -->

## A.5 Model Performance by Language

Table 4: Change in Average Validation Set Performance over Simple QA by Language &amp; Prompting Method.

|                                  | ALS    | YO     | AZ     | IG     | TR     |
|----------------------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Simple QA                        | -      | -      | -      | -      | -      |
| English Translation              | 3.51%  | 0.83%  | -0.03% | 4.41%  | 4.72%  |
| DSPy CoT                         | 26.23% | 18.85% | 14.91% | 23.59% | 12.83% |
| DSPy CoT + Translation           | 24.10% | 18.40% | 14.31% | 23.40% | 13.41% |
| DSPy ReAct                       | 24.14% | 17.36% | 17.29% | 26.00% | 16.63% |
| DSPy ReAct + English Translation | 27.83% | 23.41% | 19.28% | 26.88% | 16.10% |

Table 5: Change in Average Validation Set Performance over Simple NER by Language &amp; Prompting Method.

|                                  | ALS    | YO     | AZ     | TR     |
|----------------------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Simple NER                       | -      | -      | -      | -      |
| English Translation              | -1.55% | -0.38% | -1.12% | 0.39%  |
| DSPy CoT                         | -1.77% | 0.86%  | 2.63%  | -0.77% |
| DSPy CoT + Translation           | -3.63% | -2.32% | -1.50% | -2.67% |
| DSPy ReAct                       | -2.17% | 1.41%  | 3.10%  | -0.63% |
| DSPy ReAct + English Translation | -4.23% | -1.54% | -0.12% | -3.30% |