## Statistical Uncertainty Quantification for Aggregate Performance Metrics in Machine Learning Benchmarks

LA-UR-24-25289

Presented at the Workshop on Statistical Frontiers in LLMs and Foundation Models at NeurIPS 2024

Rachel Longjohn ∗ University of California Irvine Giri Gopalan ∗ Los Alamos National Laboratory

Emily Casleton Los Alamos National Laboratory

January 9, 2025

## Abstract

Modern artificial intelligence is supported by machine learning models (e.g., foundation models) that are pretrained on a massive data corpus and then adapted to solve a variety of downstream tasks. To summarize performance across multiple tasks, evaluation metrics are often aggregated into a summary metric, e.g., average accuracy across 10 question-answering tasks. When aggregating evaluation metrics, it is useful to incorporate uncertainty in the aggregate metric in order to gain a more realistic understanding of model performance. Our objective in this work is to demonstrate how statistical methodology can be used for quantifying uncertainty in metrics that have been aggregated across multiple tasks. The methods we emphasize are bootstrapping, Bayesian hierarchical (i.e., multilevel) modeling, and the visualization of task weightings that consider standard errors. These techniques reveal insights such as the dominance of a specific model for certain types of tasks despite an overall poor performance. We use a popular ML benchmark, the Visual Task Adaptation Benchmark (VTAB), to demonstrate the usefulness of our approaches.

## 1 Introduction

When evaluating machine learning (ML) models, some leaderboards compare models using point estimates [Lehmann and Casella, 1998], such as accuracy, computed on a test benchmark. However, relying only on point estimates ignores uncertainty in the evaluation metric being used to compare models. For instance, the metric estimated for a top-ranked model may not be realistically greater than the next highest-ranked model when accounting for sampling variability of test data. Many more difficulties arise when foundation models [Bommasani et al., 2021] are being compared as they are meant to solve many tasks instead of being trained for a single one, and to avoid making invalid conclusions about model behavior, uncertainty must be incorporated when aggregating metrics across tasks the models are adapted to solve. Our goal is to demonstrate the use of statistical methodology for aggregating metrics over many tasks that pretrained ML models are adapted to solve, which will help practitioners gain actionable insights about such models. One such insight, for instance, is that a particular model that is ranked poorly overall can be dominant when certain tasks are up-weighted.

∗ Denotes equal contribution.

Given the widespread adoption of ML for many critical tasks in a multitude of domains, it will be increasingly important for practitioners (e.g., individuals, companies, organizations, and research labs) to objectively evaluate pretrained models. We demonstrate the value of statistical analysis for uncovering insights with the Visual Task Adaptation Benchmark (VTAB) [Zhai et al., 2019], an image-based benchmark that compares pretrained models that are finetuned to solve a battery of specific tasks, generally classification or question-answering using the images.

Why VTAB? There are a few advantages to using VTAB. The first is that VTAB explicitly prohibits the use of test evaluation instances in pretraining, which is not guaranteed for foundation model benchmarks (e.g., Achiam et al. [2023]). In addition, for VTAB, the same data are used to adapt the pretrained models being compared, such that this part of the adaptation mechanism is standardized. Finally, VTAB results are explicitly broken down by task category, which is necessary for demonstrating our visualization approaches in which we examine the role of different task weightings. More details about VTAB are summarized in the Appendix.

## 1.1 Related Work

While the use of uncertainty quantification for task-aggregate metrics for foundation models appears to be a nascent area, the statistics and ML literature has long considered uncertainty quantification when comparing entities on scoreboards. One example is the contribution of Goldstein and Spiegelhalter [1996], in which the use of bootstrapped confidence intervals and Bayesian hierarchical modeling is discussed for league tables that rank, for example, surgeons in New York. It is shown that when incorporating uncertainty, there is less difference between the ranked surgeons than would otherwise be apparent. We take a similar approach of using both bootstrapping and Bayesian hierarchical modeling of benchmark data in order to incorporate uncertainties when comparing models on leaderboards based on benchmarks. In ML, Dehghani et al. [2021] advocate for the use of statistical methods for ameliorating some of the problems with typical benchmarking practices, and Colombo et al. [2022] emphasize the use of rank aggregation across tasks via Kemeny consensus, based on minimizing average Kendall distance between the consensus rank and list of ranks. The ML literature has also suggested statistical testing and resampling procedures for evaluation, especially in natural language processing, including Wein et al. [2023], Dror et al. [2020], Graham et al. [2014], Demšar [2006]. Additional relevant ML literature on rigorously comparing algorithms includes Dietterich [1998], Salzberg [1997], Jansen et al. [2023]. In contrast to these works, our work centers around statistical methods for comparing aggregate task performance metrics for pretrained models, such as foundation models.

## 1.2 Issues in Evaluating Pretrained Models and Contributions

The evaluation and benchmarking of foundation models is complicated by a number of complex issues (Figure 1). Benchmark tasks show considerable variety in quality, difficulty, and importance to the end user, and so different task weightings should be examined. Further, metrics for distinct tasks may be on different scales, which must be accounted for when aggregating metrics. Finally, quantification of uncertainties for aggregated metrics must be presented in order to help accurately determine to what extent model performances differ. A broader issue is whether ML model performance should be distilled into a single summary statistic in the first place, but we suspend argument on this point in favor of accepting that comparisons will be made based on aggregated metrics, and therefore it is pertinent to employ statistical uncertainty quantification for FM

· adapt-

· adapt

· adapt

Issue #1: Potentially uneven

quality, variability

Task 1

· measure- Issue #2:

Metrics may

not be on the

same scale

Metric 1

Issue #4: How to

obtain UQ on the

aggregate metric

<!-- image -->

task difficulties, importance,

Figure 1: Illustration of challenges when evaluating foundation models.

aggregated metrics.

In summary, our novel contributions in this paper are:

1. To demonstrate how to aggregate task metrics in an ML benchmark with well-established statistical methods (bootstrapping and Bayesian hierarchical modeling) that allow for the quantification of uncertainty, and to delineate the advantages and disadvantages of using either method;
2. New visualization tools that allow for the comparison of model performance across different categories of tasks while taking uncertainty into account with standard errors, leading to more nuanced comparisons of models that convey the impact of different task weightings; and
3. To use real benchmark data from VTAB [Zhai et al., 2019] to show how these statistical tools can uncover crucial insights that are important for users of pretrained ML models, including foundation models.

## 2 Statistical Methods

We now explain the main statistical methods that we use for aggregating performance metrics across tasks. All have been used for statistical analyses in many contexts, but here we describe their use for benchmarking pretrained models that are evaluated on several tasks. We use θ ij ∈ R to denote a statistical parameter of interest that is a performance metric for model i on task j for j = 1 , 2 , ..., J . θ ij is the main quantity of interest for evaluating model i on task j , and these θ ij 's may be aggregated over different tasks.

Taking a statistical viewpoint, in general the problem of aggregating task performances is equivalent to using benchmark data to estimate parameters that are functions of θ ij . These parameters are, for instance, the unweighted average performance across tasks for model i ; ¯ θ i. := 1 J ∑ j θ ij ; weighted aggregate performance across tasks for model i : ∑ j w j θ ij ; and difference in aggregate performance between model A and model B : ¯ θ A. -¯ θ B. .

We do not have direct access to θ ij but instead can only estimate it based on benchmark data which is a random variable, so there will be uncertainty in our estimates of θ ij and functions thereof. In general, these Bootstrap 1

Bootstrap 2

Bootstrap 3

Task 1

Metric 1

Task 2

Metric 2

Metric 2\_1

Task 3

Metric 3

Metric 3\_1

Overall

score

Agg(Metric i\_1)

data need not be independent and could have correlation, which will be addressed. We show below several approaches to aggregate uncertainty quantification. Agg(Metric i\_2)

## 2.1 Bootstrapping Evaluation Data

Agg(Metric i\_3)

The first approach we employ for quantifying uncertainty in aggregate metrics is bootstrapping [Efron and Tibshirani, 1994] the test data. To generate a bootstrap sample, we resample N j test instances with replacement, where N j is the original number of instances in task j . The aggregate metric for a particular bootstrap sample is calculated using the benchmark's aggregation mechanism (Figure 2). Since VTAB takes an average across accuracies, the sample proportion of test instances correctly answered for each task is recorded as the accuracy for a given bootstrap sample, and a mean across tasks is the aggregated score for a particular model - just as is done with the original VTAB benchmark. Uses of bootstrapping for different ML evaluation applications besides task aggregation can be found, for example, in Graham et al. [2014].

Figure 2: Illustration of bootstrap procedure for aggregate metrics.

<!-- image -->

From these bootstrapped aggregated scores, we derive a mean point estimate and use the appropriate quantiles to derive a confidence interval for ¯ θ i. ; for instance, the .025 and .975 bootstrap sample quantiles of aggregated scores for a 95% confidence interval. We may also take differences in average performances across bootstrapped samples in order to derive confidence intervals for the difference in mean performances for models A and B : ¯ θ A. -¯ θ B. . We further discuss correlations between models and tasks in the subsequent subsections.

Bootstrapping test evaluation performance is conditional on the pretrained and adapted model performances, so we are not assessing variability due to model fitting and adaptation. This is a reasonable assumption since we are interested in evaluating only fitted models (i.e., pretrained and adapted) that are to be deployed for specific tasks, as opposed to evaluating general model-fitting algorithms. Additionally, bootstrapping or employing a method such as cross validation over pretraining and training data is computationally prohibitive for foundation models, which can take on the order of many weeks to fit a single time even with large-scale computational resources (for example, see Touvron et al. [2023]). In contrast, see Bouthillier et al. [2021] for an assessment of variation due to training (e.g., learning procedure and hyperparameter optimization).

When comparing confidence intervals for mean task performances across different models, it is important not to interpret overlapping 95% confidence intervals as evidence of no statistically significant difference at α = . 05 . To mitigate the possibility of this misinterpretation in our VTAB analysis, we display 83.4% confidence intervals for mean performances, as suggested by Goldstein and Healy [1995]; this shorter length allows overlap to correspond to an α = . 05 . The more appropriate way to address comparisons of multiple models, however, is to determine confidence intervals for pairwise differences in aggregated task performance. We also present these confidence intervals along with a multiple comparisons Bonferroni correction, which guards against a single false rejection of the null amongst several hypotheses but can be conservative for many comparisons. This is not much of a concern for us, however, because we simultaneously compare only the top few models.

The bootstrap samples also provide a means to estimate ranks with confidence intervals for models' aggregate performance for various rank aggregation mechanisms. For example, one may use the sample ranks based on average task performance for each bootstrap sample in order to estimate the overall model ranks, where the population model ranks are defined by ranking the average performance parameters ¯ θ i. .

## 2.2 Bayesian Hierarchical Modeling of Evaluation Data

An alternative to the bootstrap for quantifying uncertainties in task-aggregate metrics is a Bayesian hierarchical model (BHM). In comparison to bootstrapping, this approach can be advantageous because a distribution over each model's task performances can encode prior knowledge of model performance, helping to adjust estimates of model performance to be more realistic and less variable when some tasks have much fewer items compared to others. Also one can explicitly model correlations between different task performances or between models; for example, between-task correlations would not be accounted for due to the resampling procedure discussed previously for the bootstrap.

On the other hand, prior information about model performance can be difficult to elicit and encode into a prior distribution, and fitting a BHM can be more difficult computationally than bootstrapping. Nonetheless, a BHM is another important option for quantifying uncertainties in aggregate task metrics. We note that Bayesian modeling has been used in ML evaluation before. For example, in Ji et al. [2021], they use beta-binomial models in a sequential design setting and also suggest the potential utility of a hierarchical approach. In Benavoli et al. [2017], they employ Bayesian hierarchical modeling for the problem of modeling cross-validation data for classifiers.

Here we illustrate a beta-binomial hierarchical model for the analysis of benchmarks that use accuracy as the performance metric. For model i and task j , we denote Y ij as the number of correct responses, N j as the number of test items for task j , and θ ij as the probability of a correct response for model i on task j . Further, we assume a binomial model for the number of correct responses along with a beta (conjugate) prior for each task-model probability. That is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the data model, and the model for θ ij is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conditioning on θ ij , Y ij is independent of the rest of the data, and likewise for parameter θ ij conditional on α i , β i . The BHM specification is completed by putting a distribution on α i , β i :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and These are assumed to be independent draws ∀ i . An important variation of the above model is when the data for each task-model combination are in the form of confusion matrices - widely used metrics like F1-score are derived from these counts. To accommodate this setting, one could modify the binomial distribution to be a multinomial, where the probabilities are of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative and a Dirichlet prior is used; see Tötsch and Hoffmann [2021] for the multinomial Dirichlet set up. However, using a hierarchy as above (i.e., a prior for the Dirichlet parameters) allows for shrinkage of estimates and for the incorporation of prior knowledge of model performance.

The posterior of the above beta-binomial hierarchical model is not available in closed form. We thus implemented a Gibbs sampler for VTAB in which the conditional distribution of θ ij given all else is a beta distribution by conjugacy. However, the conditional distributions of α i given all else and β i given all else are not analytically recognizable distributions and we use a slice sampling MCMC step within Gibbs [Neal, 2003]. One could instead use a probabilistic programming language to sample if desired. We use λ α = λ β = 1 / 10000 to allow for a wide range of plausible prior success and failure counts; however, to increase shrinkage, one could use a more stringent prior, for instance that shrinks estimates of θ ij to be closer to the grand mean of performance of model i . To illustrate, we conducted a basic simulation study as follows.

Simulation study Consider when two models are compared on three question-and-answering tasks. Let θ ij denote model i 's probability of accurate response on task j , and assume that θ Aj = . 5 for j = 1 , 2 , 3 while θ B 1 = . 525 and θ B 2 = θ B 3 = . 5 ; hence model B is the better performing model . Let the test set sizes be N 1 = 200 for the first task, N 2 = 10000 for the second task, and N 3 = 20000 for the third task. Assume that after evaluating the two models on the three tasks, we obtain the number of correct responses in Table 1.

Table 1: Summary of the number of correct questions answered by two models in three question-andanswering tasks.

|         |   Task 1 N 1 = 200 |   Task 2 N 2 = 1000 |   Task 3 N 3 = 20000 |
|---------|--------------------|---------------------|----------------------|
| Model A |                100 |                5000 |                10000 |
| Model B |                115 |                5000 |                10000 |

We consider the parameter of interest ¯ θ A. -¯ θ B. for the difference in mean performances between models A and B, which we know is truly negative in this example. A 95% bootstrapped confidence interval that uses the difference in average sample accuracies across the three tasks yields the following: (-.059, .097); since the interval contains 0, one arrives at the wrong conclusion that there is no difference between the model performances.

In comparison, consider instead a beta-binomial Bayesian hierarchical model as previously described that allows us to encode prior information on task performances, which dampens the effect of increased variability because of a small number of questions in task 1. Specifically, consider normal priors for the prior success and failure counts α i and β i :

- α 1 ∼ N (2000 , 10)
- α 2 ∼ N (2100 , 10)
- β 1 ∼ N (2000 , 10)

- β 2 ∼ N (1900 , 10) ,

where N ( µ, σ ) indicates a normal distribution with mean µ and standard deviation σ ; we further truncate at 0 to ensure positivity, though the difference is neglibile since 0 is about 20 standard deviations below the mean. These priors adjust estimates for tasks that have a small number of questions (task 1 in this example) such that they have less variability (due to 4000 prior counts). Here, we find that the 95% credibility interval for ¯ θ A. -¯ θ B. is (-0.021, -0.003). Since the interval is strictly negative, we are led to the correct conclusion that model B is better than model A.

Once posterior samples of θ ij are drawn, one can sample from the posterior predictive distribution of task performances in order to obtain a posterior predictive credibility interval for aggregated accuracy and also derive posterior rank probabilities based on ranks of ∑ J j =1 w j θ ij , a weighted sum of task performance parameters; more on the analysis of task weightings is provided in the next section.

## 2.3 Weighting Task Performances

We consider weighting task performances with weights w 1 , ..., w J such that ∑ J j =1 w j = 1 and w j ≥ 0 . Let Y Aj and Y Bj be task performances of model A and model B respectively for j = 1 , ..., J . Model A 's aggregated score is S A := ∑ J j =1 w j Y Aj and model B 's aggregated score is S B := ∑ J j =1 w j Y Bj ; if task performances are unbiased estimators of performance parameters θ Aj and θ Bj , then by linearity of expectation, S A and S B are unbiased for the aggregate performance parameters ∑ J j =1 w j θ Aj and ∑ J j =1 w j θ Bj , respectively. However, concluding that the aggregate performance of model A is greater than that of model B because S A &gt; S B is incorrect because it ignores the variances of S A and S B .

For example, the variance of S A is calculated by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Additional derivations for standard errors specific to VTAB are provided in the Appendix. We note that one consequence of this identity is that if task performances are positively correlated, then the variance of S A assuming independence lower bounds the variance of S A with dependence. In this sense, estimating the variance of S A under independence across tasks is a conservative approach.

An additional observation will help to interpret the task-weighting visualizations that follow when considering correlations between the performances of two models. The plots depend on the variance of the difference in scores between the top two performing models:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ A,B is the correlation between aggregated task performance of model A and model B . We can use this identity to investigate the effect of correlation between top-performing models in the visualizations we use in our VTAB analysis. For instance, if the variances of S A and S B are close, and ρ = . 5 , then the standard deviation of the difference is about 70% of the value in the independent case. The Appendix contains a more general identity for addressing between-model correlation.

## 2.4 Metric Normalization

An approach to normalizing metrics is given by BigBench [Srivastava et al., 2022], which is raw -low high -low , where high is an upper bound for a task score, low is a lower bound for a task score, and raw is the unadjusted score on a task - such normalization maps scores to the interval [0, 1]. One approach to high and low scores is to use a pre-defined baseline score (e.g., a baseline for accuracy could correspond to guessing randomly). However this can be more difficult to determine for a high score, and for the low score, one may want to consider floors that are better than the worst possible scenario. In the following analysis, we estimate the high and low scores from bootstrap samples; high for a particular task is the maximum score over all bootstrap samples, and similarly for low .

An alternative approach to putting all tasks on the same scale is to use rankings, for instance as is suggested by Colombo et al. [2022]. One drawback to rank aggregation is that it ignores information in the distances between different models in the process of transforming data to a list of ranks. Nonetheless, aggregating rankings is an important approach to compare models, which we illustrate in a variety of ways in the following section. There is also a growing body of statistical literature on performing ranking with quantified uncertainties Goldstein and Spiegelhalter [1996], Deng et al. [2014], Xie et al. [2009], Rising [2021], Barrientos et al. [2023], Li et al. [2022], Hall and Miller [2010].

## 3 Application to VTAB

We applied the techniques described above to evaluate the performance of all 16 models from the VTAB 1-k leaderboard. For ease of presentation, we focus on the results for the top six models here and make the complete results available in the Appendix. We also include a summary of the VTAB benchmark in the Appendix. Since we do not have the per-task responses across the 16 fine-tuned models compared for VTAB, we used simulated data consistent with the per-task accuracies for each model on the VTAB leaderboard 1 , and we extract the per-task test set sizes from the VTAB GitHub repository 2 . This application may serve as an example of the value of applying the statistical methods described previously to aggregation of task metrics for pretrained models in general benchmarks.

## 3.1 Confidence and Credibility Intervals for Aggregated Performances

Table 2 shows the point and interval estimates for each model's unweighted aggregate performance on the benchmark using: 1) across-task average accuracy with 83.4% confidence intervals using the bootstrapped test data, 2) across-task average accuracy with 83.4% credible intervals using the BHM, and 3) across-task average normalized accuracy with 83.4% confidence intervals using the bootstrapped test data. Recall we display 83.4% intervals as based on Goldstein and Healy [1995], as to mitigate misinterpretation of overlapping 95 % confidence intervals. Overall, the results in Table 2 suggest that the two supervised methods, Sup-Rotation100% (SR-100%) and Sup-Exemplar-100% (SE-100%), perform the best but that there are not meaningful differences in these two models' unweighted aggregate performance. As expected, the point estimates for the unnormalized average accuracy preserve the original ranking of the models, with SR-100% having the highest estimated average accuracy and SE-100% in second place. Looking at this alone might suggest SR-100%'s dominance. When looking at the results using the average normalized accuracy, the possible conclusions change; the ranking of the top two models according to their point estimates is reversed, and their confidence intervals are non-overlapping. Doing well under the normalization scheme suggests that a model performs particularly strong in harder tasks, in which the minimum observed value of the performance metric is lower. Under the normalization scheme, the results suggest that Sup-Exemplar-100% would be the dominant model. Similar findings could be expressed when comparing the semi-supervised versions of these two models as well.

[1 https://google-research.github.io/task\_adaptation/benchmark](https://google-research.github.io/task_adaptation/benchmark)

[2 https://github.com/google-research/task\_adaptation](https://github.com/google-research/task_adaptation)

Table 2: Average accuracy across VTAB's 19 tasks with interval estimates using the bootstrapped evaluation data and the Bayesian hierarchical model, and average normalized accuracy using the bootstrapped evaluation data. We display 83.4% intervals, as per Goldstein and Healy [1995].

| Model             | Avg Acc (Bootstrap)   | Avg Acc (Bayesian HM)   | Avg Norm Acc      |
|-------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Sup-Rotation-100% | 68.0 (67.8, 68.1)     | 68.0 (67.7, 68.2)       | 88.4 (87.9, 88.7) |
| Sup-Exemplar-100% | 67.6 (67.4, 67.9)     | 67.6 (67.4, 67.9)       | 89.5 (89.0, 90.0) |
| Sup-100%          | 66.4 (66.2, 66.5)     | 66.3 (66.1, 66.6)       | 85.1 (84.6, 85.6) |
| Semi-Exemplar-10% | 65.3 (65.1, 65.5)     | 65.3 (65.0, 65.6)       | 83.3 (82.9, 83.6) |
| Semi-Rotation-10% | 65.1 (64.9, 65.3)     | 65.1 (64.8, 65.3)       | 83.7 (83.3, 84.1) |
| Rotation          | 60.4 (60.3, 60.6)     | 60.4 (60.2, 60.7)       | 77.6 (77.3, 78.0) |

We investigate this further by conducting pairwise comparisons in the performance differences of the top three models. As discussed in Section 2.1, when comparing two models, the pairwise difference in mean task performance is the true quantity of interest. Table 3 presents the point and interval estimates for these pairwise differences, using the Bonferroni correction for conducting three comparisons. Across all three metric uncertainty quantification techniques, it cannot be concluded that there are differences in the unweighted aggregate performance of SR-100% and SE-100%; both models outperform Sup-100% (S-100%).

Table 3: Point estimates and confidence intervals for the pairwise differences in average accuracies and average normalized accuracies for the top three performing models. We display 95% intervals with a Bonferroni adjustment for 3 comparisons.

| Comparison        | Avg Acc Diff (Bootstrap)   | Avg Acc Diff (Bayesian HM)   | Avg Norm Acc Diff   |
|-------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------|
| SR-100% - SE-100% | 0.3 (-0.1, 0.8)            | 0.3 (-0.3, 0.9)              | -1.1 (-2.1, 0.0)    |
| SR-100% - S-100%  | 1.6 ( 1.2, 2.0)            | 1.6 ( 1.0, 2.2)              | 3.3 ( 2.3, 4.3)     |
| SE-100% - S-100%  | 1.3 ( 0.9, 1.7)            | 1.3 ( 0.7, 1.9)              | 4.4 ( 3.4, 5.3)     |

## 3.2 Confidence and Credible Intervals for Aggregated Ranks

In Tables 4 and 5, we present 95% confidence intervals for several rank aggregation schemes for the unnormalized and normalized metrics, respectively. This includes several rank aggregation techniques based on those used in the appendix of the VTAB paper: 1) ranking by the unweighted arithmetic mean of the accuracies, 2) ranking by the geometric mean, 3) rank first on a per-task basis and then take the across-task average rank, 4) same as 3 but add in standard normal noise before ranking, and 5) same as 3 but bin the accuracies into buckets of size 1% before ranking, where being in the same bin results in a tie rank. We can also use samples from the posterior predictive distribution of the BHM to get credible intervals, which give similar results (see Table 11 in the Appendix). Across all rank aggregation strategies, we see general agreement with the conclusions above. Within the supervised and semi-supervised model classes, there do not appear to be meaningful differences in overall performance between the Rotation and Exemplar versions of these models. Interestingly, there is some disagreement across the rank aggregation strategies about the relative performance of the Rotation model, originally placed sixth. The aggregation strategies based on the average rank can reward more heavily slight edges in performance across multiple tasks while only lightly penalizing large gaps in performance that do not change relative positions much. This suggests that there are several tasks for which Rotation performs competitively, or outperforms, previously higher-ranking models.

Table 4: 95% confidence intervals for rank aggregation of unnormalized accuracy using bootstrapped test data.

| Model      | By avg         | Geom mean      | Avg rank (AvR)   | AvR (noise)    | AvR (bins)     |
|------------|----------------|----------------|------------------|----------------|----------------|
| SR-100%    | 1.0 (1.0, 2.0) | 1.4 (1.0, 2.0) | 3.8 (3.6, 4.0)   | 3.8 (3.2, 4.4) | 4.2 (3.9, 4.4) |
| SE-100%    | 2.0 (1.0, 2.0) | 1.6 (1.0, 2.0) | 3.9 (3.6, 4.2)   | 4.0 (3.5, 4.6) | 4.5 (4.1, 4.8) |
| S-100%     | 3.0 (3.0, 3.0) | 3.0 (3.0, 3.0) | 5.0 (4.7, 5.3)   | 5.0 (4.5, 5.7) | 5.5 (5.1, 5.9) |
| Semi-E-10% | 4.1 (4.0, 5.0) | 4.0 (4.0, 4.5) | 5.5 (5.3, 5.7)   | 5.4 (4.8, 5.9) | 5.9 (5.6, 6.2) |
| Semi-R-10% | 4.9 (4.0, 5.0) | 5.0 (4.5, 5.0) | 5.4 (5.1, 5.7)   | 5.3 (4.7, 5.9) | 5.9 (5.5, 6.2) |
| Rotation   | 6.0 (6.0, 6.0) | 6.0 (6.0, 6.0) | 4.9 (4.7, 5.2)   | 5.0 (4.4, 5.4) | 5.2 (5.0, 5.4) |

Table 5: 95% confidence intervals for rank aggregation of normalized accuracy using bootstrapped test data.

| Model      | By avg         | Geom mean      | Avg rank (AvR)   | AvR (noise)    | AvR (bins)     |
|------------|----------------|----------------|------------------|----------------|----------------|
| SR-100%    | 2.0 (2.0, 2.0) | 2.0 (2.0, 2.0) | 3.8 (3.6, 4.0)   | 3.9 (3.5, 4.2) | 3.9 (3.7, 4.2) |
| SE-100%    | 1.0 (1.0, 1.0) | 1.0 (1.0, 1.0) | 3.9 (3.6, 4.2)   | 3.9 (3.6, 4.3) | 4.1 (3.8, 4.4) |
| S-100%     | 3.0 (3.0, 3.0) | 3.0 (3.0, 3.0) | 5.0 (4.7, 5.3)   | 5.0 (4.5, 5.4) | 5.2 (4.8, 5.6) |
| Semi-E-10% | 4.8 (4.0, 5.0) | 4.9 (4.0, 5.0) | 5.5 (5.3, 5.7)   | 5.5 (5.1, 5.8) | 5.6 (5.4, 5.8) |
| Semi-R-10% | 4.2 (4.0, 5.0) | 4.1 (4.0, 5.0) | 5.4 (5.1, 5.7)   | 5.3 (5.0, 5.7) | 5.6 (5.3, 5.9) |
| Rotation   | 6.0 (6.0, 6.0) | 6.0 (6.0, 6.0) | 4.9 (4.7, 5.2)   | 5.0 (4.7, 5.2) | 5.0 (4.8, 5.3) |

## 3.3 Visualizing Task Weightings with Uncertainty

In some application settings, it may make sense to weigh particular tasks more heavily in the evaluation, e.g., if a practitioner cares more about a model doing well at tasks with structured images but would still like the model to perform reasonably well at tasks with natural or specialized images. In such instances, it may be difficult to specify or justify a particular instantiation of such weights that makes sense (e.g., 0.7, 0.15, 0.15), but instead one may only be able to express some qualitative intuitions, such as caring most about structured images.

To visualize multiple weighting schemes simultaneously, we construct a plot on the simplex which shades a region according to which model performs the best for particular weighting schemes in which the weights sum to 1. These plots were created using plotting functions from the open-source R package, Ternary [Smith, 2017], with customizations to account for discrete-valued shading. Gray regions on the plot indicate an indeterminate result, in which the differences in performance for the top two performing models is within z standard errors of 0. Here, a standard error is computed for the difference in weighted task performance between the top two models. We focus on weighting across the three different task categories in VTAB: natural, specialized, and structured images.

Figures 3 and 4 show these plots for the unnormalized and normalized metrics, respectively. Based on the findings in Section 2.3 related to the potential correlations between model performance, we show these plots for values of z = 2 and z = 2 √ 1 / 2 ≈ 1 . 4 to account for the potential reduction in standard deviation that Best Performing Model Using Weighted Avg Norm Accuracy Best Performing Model Using Weighted Avg Accuracy Indeterminate = within 2 standard errors Indeterminate = within 2 standard errors Model Sup-Rotation-100%

Model

Sup-Rotation-100%

Sup-Exemplar-100%

Sup-100%

Sup-100%

Semi-Rotation-10%

Rotation

Indeterminate

0

Best Performing Model Using Weighted Avg Accuracy

Best Performing Model Using Weighted Avg Norm Accuracy

Indeterminate = within 1.4 standard errors

Indeterminate = within 1.4 standard errors

Model

Sup-Rotation-100%

Model

Sup-Rotation-100%

0

Sup-Exemplar-100%

Figure 3: Visualization of differences in model performance under different category weightings using the unnormalized accuracies. Semi-Rotation-10% 0.2 0.8 Rotation 0.3

Rotation

Indeterminate

0.4

0.4

0.7

0.6

0.7

0.6

<!-- image -->

0.9

1

0.9

1

Figure 4: Visualization of differences in model performance under different category weightings using the normalized accuracies.

<!-- image -->

could be present for correlated model performances. A robust result across all of these plots is that when structured images are weighted heavily in the aggregation, Rotation is suggested as the best performing model. This aligns with the findings suggested by the average rank-based aggregation schemes in Tables 4 and 5. Similar conclusions are also suggested by the BHM (Figure 5 in the Appendix).

Taken together, the differences between Figures 3 and 4 further reinforce that there do not appear to be meaningful differences in performance between the SR-100% and SE-100% models for many of the possible values of the weights. Unlike in the pairwise differences in Table 3, the values in these plots are not meant to indicate statistical significance but instead are intended to be a graphical depiction which still takes into account uncertainty. Such visualizations could be a helpful tool in settings in which model decisions need to be made, or model evaluations need to be communicated to relevant stakeholders.

· 0.7

·

Rotation

Indeterminate

Indeterminate

0.4

0.3

0.4

Natural

·

Structured

Structured Natural

## 4 Discussion and Conclusion

Our main contribution is to demonstrate statistical methods for aggregating task performances of pretrained and adpated models, such as foundation models, with quantified uncertainties. We have used benchmark data from VTAB in performing this demonstration and have highlighted bootstrapping of task evaluation data, Bayesian hierarchical modeling, and visualizing task weighting with standard errors. The value of this type of statistical analysis was demonstrated by revealing insights such as the fact that a low-ranked model (Rotation) is superior depending on task weighting (while accounting for uncertainty). An additional insight is that certain models may essentially be of the same overall performance when uncertainty is accounted for, despite that their aggregate point estimates are distinct. These statistical analyses will ideally serve as a blueprint for the benchmarking of foundation models for practitioners, and we aim to develop ways to incorporate prediction uncertainty in future work.

## Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the NNSA (NA-22) Office of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development for supporting this research and Padhraic Smyth and Natalie Klein for feedback on earlier versions of this paper. The LA-UR for this work is LA-UR-24-25289 .

## References

- Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023.
- Andrés F Barrientos, Deborshee Sen, Garritt L Page, and David B Dunson. Bayesian inferences on uncertain ranks and orderings: Application to ranking players and lineups. Bayesian Analysis , 18(3):777-806, 2023.
- Alessio Benavoli, Giorgio Corani, Janez Demšar, and Marco Zaffalon. Time for a change: A tutorial for comparing multiple classifiers through Bayesian analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(77): 1-36, 2017.
- Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, S. Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen A. Creel, Jared Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren E. Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas F. Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, O. Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir P. Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Benjamin Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, J. F. Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Robert Reich, Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf H. Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher R'e, Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishna Parasuram Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei A. Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. ArXiv , 2021. URL https://crfm.stanford.edu/assets/report.pdf .
- Xavier Bouthillier, Pierre Delaunay, Mirko Bronzi, Assya Trofimov, Brennan Nichyporuk, Justin Szeto, Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand, Edward Raff, Kanika Madan, Vikram Voleti, et al. Accounting for variance in machine learning benchmarks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , 3:747-769, 2021.
- Pierre Colombo, Nathan Noiry, Ekhine Irurozki, and Stéphan Clémençon. What are the best systems? New perspectives on NLP benchmarking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:26915-26932, 2022.
- Mostafa Dehghani, Yi Tay, Alexey A Gritsenko, Zhe Zhao, Neil Houlsby, Fernando Diaz, Donald Metzler, and Oriol Vinyals. The benchmark lottery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07002 , 2021.
- Janez Demšar. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7:1-30, 2006.

- Ke Deng, Simeng Han, Kate J Li, and Jun S Liu. Bayesian aggregation of order-based rank data. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 109(507):1023-1039, 2014.
- Thomas G Dietterich. Approximate statistical tests for comparing supervised classification learning algorithms. Neural computation , 10(7):1895-1923, 1998.
- Rotem Dror, Lotem Peled-Cohen, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Reichart. Statistical significance testing for natural language processing . Springer, 2020.
- Bradley Efron and Robert J Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap . Chapman and Hall/CRC, 1994.
- Harvey Goldstein and Michael JR Healy. The graphical presentation of a collection of means. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) , 158(1):175-177, 1995.
- Harvey Goldstein and David J Spiegelhalter. League tables and their limitations: Statistical issues in comparisons of institutional performance. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A: Statistics in Society , 159(3):385-409, 1996.
- Yvette Graham, Nitika Mathur, and Timothy Baldwin. Randomized significance tests in machine translation. In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , pages 266-274, 2014.
- Peter Hall and Hugh Miller. Modeling the variability of rankings. The Annals of Statistics , pages 2652-2677, 2010.
- Christoph Jansen, Malte Nalenz, Georg Schollmeyer, and Thomas Augustin. Statistical comparisons of classifiers by generalized stochastic dominance. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(231):1-37, 2023.
- Disi Ji, Robert L Logan, Padhraic Smyth, and Mark Steyvers. Active Bayesian assessment of black-box classifiers. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pages 7935-7944, 2021.
- Erich L Lehmann and George Casella. Theory of Point Estimation . Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 1998.
- Xinran Li, Dingdong Yi, and Jun S Liu. Bayesian analysis of rank data with covariates and heterogeneous rankers. Statistical Science , 37(1):1-23, 2022.
- Radford M Neal. Slice sampling. The Annals of Statistics , 31(3):705-767, 2003.
- Justin Rising. Uncertainty in ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03459 , 2021.
- Steven L Salzberg. On comparing classifiers: Pitfalls to avoid and a recommended approach. Data mining and knowledge discovery , 1:317-328, 1997.
- Martin R. Smith. Ternary: An R Package for Creating Ternary Plots. Comprehensive R Archive Network , 2017. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1068996.
- Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615 , 2022.

- Niklas Tötsch and Daniel Hoffmann. Classifier uncertainty: Evidence, potential impact, and probabilistic treatment. PeerJ Computer Science , 7:e398, 2021.
- Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023.
- Shira Wein, Christopher Homan, Lora Aroyo, and Chris Welty. Follow the leader (board) with confidence: Estimating p-values from a single test set with item and response variance. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 3138-3161, 2023.
- Minge Xie, Kesar Singh, and Cun-Hui Zhang. Confidence intervals for population ranks in the presence of ties and near ties. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 104(486):775-788, 2009.
- Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Alexander Kolesnikov, Pierre Ruyssen, Carlos Riquelme, Mario Lucic, Josip Djolonga, Andre Susano Pinto, Maxim Neumann, Alexey Dosovitskiy, et al. A large-scale study of representation learning with the visual task adaptation benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04867 , 2019.

## A Appendix

## A.1 VTAB Benchmark Summary

We demonstrate statistical methods based on evaluation data from a widely-used, existing benchmark: the visual task adaptation benchmark (VTAB) [Zhai et al., 2019]. VTAB is used for image (e.g., computer vision) models, originally developed to assess representation learning. The benchmark consists of 19 classification tasks split into 3 categories: natural, specialized, and structured. We use data on the 16 pretrained models compared on the original VTAB leaderboard 3 , though VTAB has been used for benchmarking additional models. The natural category consists of tasks such as classifying pictures of animals; specialized tasks include medical problems such as predicting the presence of metastatic cancerous tissue; structured tasks include predicting the orientation of an object in an image and finding the depth of an object in an image. For this work we rely on VTAB-1k, which allows each model 1000 labeled images per task to use in the adaptation stage, but does not constrain resources allowed for pretraining. There are between 711 to 73,728 test instances in the 19 tasks provided by VTAB, the numbers of which can be verified at the GitHub repository 4 . Models are scored on VTAB by aggregating per-task accuracy with an unweighted average across the 19 tasks. VTAB aggregates accuracies on distinct tasks for leaderboards. VTAB is a prime benchmark to use for our statistical analyses because it standardizes the data resources allowed for adaptation of a pretrained model, and ' representations are not pretrained on the evaluation tasks themselves (which VTAB forbids) ' [Zhai et al., 2019]. We note that VTAB does standardize the data resources allowed for training and validation when adapting pretrained vision models compared; moreover VTAB also shows evidence that fine-tuning stabilizes after a fixed number of steps.

## A.2 Standard Error Derivations

Standard error calculations for VTAB task weighting plots are given here assuming independence between tasks; Section 2.3 addresses the issue of correlation between tasks. Let ˆ p Aj be the accuracy of model A on natural task j of N Nat . Let ¯ p A,Nat be average accuracy for the natural tasks for model A , which is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have thus the following variance.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We use a binomial standard error squared for V ar [ˆ p Aj ] , which is ˆ p Aj (1 -ˆ p Ai ) N j . The same holds for the specialized and structured categories. Now, we consider the variance of the weighted score for model A :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[3 https://google-research.github.io/task\_adaptation/benchmark](https://google-research.github.io/task_adaptation/benchmark)

[4 https://github.com/google-research/task\_adaptation](https://github.com/google-research/task_adaptation)

From which the variance can be calculated:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The standard errors used in the task weighting simplex plots are calculated based on V ar [ S A -S B ] , which is V ar [ S A ] + V ar [ S B ] , if independence is assumed between distinct models. Section 2.3 addresses how we account for correlation between models by reducing the standard error; here we include a more general statement:

Denote V ar [ S A ] := σ 2 and write V ar [ S B ] := kσ 2 for some positive constant k ≥ 1 (assume without loss of generality that V ar [ S B ] ≥ V ar [ S A ] ). Then, V ar [ S A -S B ] = σ 2 + kσ 2 -2 ρ √ ( kσ 2 ) σ 2 . Thus, the standard deviation of the difference assuming correlation is reduced by a factor of √ ( k +1) -2 ρ √ k k +1 .

## A.3 Full Results

Table 6: VTAB leaderboard with 83.4% interval estimates using the bootstrapped standard errors.

| Model             | Natural           | Specialized       | Structured        | Overall           |
|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Sup-Rotation-100% | 73.6 (73.2, 73.9) | 83.1 (82.9, 83.3) | 55.5 (55.2, 55.7) | 68.0 (67.8, 68.1) |
| Sup-Exemplar-100% | 73.6 (73.3, 74.0) | 83.1 (82.8, 83.4) | 54.7 (54.3, 55.0) | 67.6 (67.4, 67.9) |
| Sup-100%          | 73.4 (73.2, 73.7) | 82.5 (82.2, 82.7) | 52.1 (51.7, 52.5) | 66.4 (66.2, 66.5) |
| Semi-Exemplar-10% | 70.2 (70.0, 70.5) | 81.8 (81.6, 82.1) | 52.7 (52.4, 53.1) | 65.3 (65.1, 65.5) |
| Semi-Rotation-10% | 69.5 (69.2, 69.8) | 82.4 (82.2, 82.6) | 52.5 (52.2, 52.9) | 65.1 (64.9, 65.3) |
| Rotation          | 53.7 (53.3, 54.0) | 78.6 (78.3, 78.8) | 57.3 (57.0, 57.6) | 60.4 (60.3, 60.6) |
| Exemplar          | 48.9 (48.6, 49.2) | 78.4 (78.2, 78.6) | 55.8 (55.4, 56.2) | 58.0 (57.8, 58.3) |
| Rel.Pat.Loc       | 46.0 (45.7, 46.3) | 76.5 (76.3, 76.7) | 48.3 (48.0, 48.6) | 53.4 (53.2, 53.6) |
| Jigsaw            | 44.0 (43.7, 44.3) | 76.5 (76.3, 76.9) | 47.9 (47.6, 48.2) | 52.5 (52.3, 52.7) |
| Uncond-BigGAN     | 35.9 (35.6, 36.2) | 63.0 (62.7, 63.4) | 45.7 (45.4, 46.0) | 45.8 (45.6, 46.0) |
| From-Scratch      | 27.9 (27.6, 28.2) | 68.9 (68.6, 69.2) | 43.6 (43.2, 43.9) | 43.1 (43.0, 43.3) |
| Cond-BigGAN       | 39.5 (39.2, 39.8) | 57.4 (57.0, 57.8) | 35.1 (34.7, 35.4) | 41.4 (41.2, 41.6) |
| WAE-MMD           | 20.8 (20.6, 21.0) | 60.6 (60.4, 60.9) | 43.4 (43.1, 43.7) | 38.7 (38.5, 38.8) |
| VAE               | 19.4 (19.2, 19.6) | 59.2 (58.9, 59.5) | 44.2 (43.9, 44.6) | 38.2 (38.0, 38.4) |
| WAE-UKL           | 15.0 (14.8, 15.2) | 55.2 (55.0, 55.6) | 39.0 (38.7, 39.3) | 33.6 (33.4, 33.8) |
| WAE-GAN           | 15.6 (15.4, 15.8) | 54.0 (53.8, 54.2) | 38.5 (38.1, 38.8) | 33.3 (33.1, 33.5) |

Table 7: VTAB leaderboard with 83.4% credible intervals from the Bayesian hierarchical model.

| Model             | Natural           | Specialized       | Structured        | Overall           |
|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Sup-Rotation-100% | 73.6 (73.2, 74.0) | 83.1 (82.8, 83.4) | 55.5 (55.0, 55.9) | 68.0 (67.7, 68.2) |
| Sup-Exemplar-100% | 73.6 (73.2, 74.1) | 83.1 (82.7, 83.4) | 54.7 (54.2, 55.1) | 67.6 (67.4, 67.9) |
| Sup-100%          | 73.4 (73.0, 73.8) | 82.5 (82.1, 82.8) | 52.1 (51.6, 52.6) | 66.3 (66.1, 66.6) |
| Semi-Exemplar-10% | 70.2 (69.8, 70.7) | 81.8 (81.5, 82.2) | 52.7 (52.2, 53.2) | 65.3 (65.0, 65.5) |
| Semi-Rotation-10% | 69.5 (69.1, 70.0) | 82.4 (82.0, 82.7) | 52.5 (52.0, 53.0) | 65.1 (64.8, 65.3) |
| Rotation          | 53.7 (53.2, 54.2) | 78.5 (78.2, 78.9) | 57.3 (56.8, 57.7) | 60.4 (60.2, 60.7) |
| Exemplar          | 48.9 (48.5, 49.4) | 78.4 (78.0, 78.7) | 55.8 (55.3, 56.2) | 58.0 (57.7, 58.3) |
| Rel.Pat.Loc       | 46.0 (45.5, 46.5) | 76.5 (76.2, 76.9) | 48.4 (47.9, 48.9) | 53.4 (53.2, 53.7) |
| Jigsaw            | 44.0 (43.5, 44.4) | 76.5 (76.1, 76.9) | 47.9 (47.4, 48.3) | 52.5 (52.2, 52.7) |
| Uncond-BigGAN     | 35.9 (35.5, 36.4) | 63.1 (62.6, 63.5) | 45.7 (45.2, 46.2) | 45.8 (45.5, 46.0) |
| From-Scratch      | 27.9 (27.5, 28.3) | 68.9 (68.5, 69.4) | 43.6 (43.0, 44.1) | 43.1 (42.9, 43.4) |
| Cond-BigGAN       | 39.5 (39.0, 40.0) | 57.4 (56.9, 57.9) | 35.1 (34.6, 35.6) | 41.4 (41.1, 41.7) |
| WAE-MMD           | 20.8 (20.5, 21.1) | 60.6 (60.2, 61.0) | 43.4 (42.9, 43.9) | 38.7 (38.4, 38.9) |
| VAE               | 19.4 (19.1, 19.8) | 59.2 (58.8, 59.6) | 44.2 (43.7, 44.7) | 38.2 (38.0, 38.5) |
| WAE-UKL           | 15.1 (14.8, 15.4) | 55.2 (54.8, 55.7) | 39.0 (38.5, 39.5) | 33.6 (33.3, 33.9) |
| WAE-GAN           | 15.6 (15.3, 15.9) | 54.0 (53.5, 54.4) | 38.4 (37.9, 38.9) | 33.3 (33.0, 33.5) |

Sup-Rotation-100%

Sup-Rotation-100%

1.00

1.00

·0.75

à 0.50

osterior

20,50

posantor

- 0.25

0.00

0.00

2

3

1

2

3

Rank"

Semi-Exemplar-10%

1.00

Semi-Exemplar-10%

1.00

0.50

poserior

0.25

Posterior Probability

0.00

0.00

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

Rank

4

Rank

4

Rank Sup-Exemplar-100%

Sup-Exemplar-100%

1.00

1.00

Sup-100%

Sup-100%

1.00

1.00

Figure 5: Posterior probabilities over model ranks for average accuracy weighted to favor structured image tasks using the Bayesian hierarchical model from 2.2 ( w Str = 0 . 95 , w Nat = w Spe = 0 . 025 ).

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: Posterior probabilities over model ranks for unweighted average accuracy using the Bayesian hierarchical model from 2.2.

<!-- image -->

Table 8: Rank aggregation of average accuracy using bootstrapped test data.

| Model         | By avg            | Geom mean         | Avg rank (AvR)    | AvR (noise)       | AvR (bins)        |
|---------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| SR-100%       | 1.0 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 1.4 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 3.8 ( 3.6, 4.0)   | 3.8 ( 3.2, 4.4)   | 4.2 ( 3.9, 4.4)   |
| SE-100%       | 2.0 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 1.6 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 3.9 ( 3.6, 4.2)   | 4.0 ( 3.5, 4.6)   | 4.5 ( 4.1, 4.8)   |
| Sup-100%      | 3.0 ( 3.0, 3.0)   | 3.0 ( 3.0, 3.0)   | 5.0 ( 4.7, 5.3)   | 5.0 ( 4.5, 5.7)   | 5.5 ( 5.1, 5.9)   |
| Semi-E-10%    | 4.1 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 4.0 ( 4.0, 4.5)   | 5.5 ( 5.3, 5.7)   | 5.4 ( 4.8, 5.9)   | 5.9 ( 5.6, 6.2)   |
| Semi-R-10%    | 4.9 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 5.0 ( 4.5, 5.0)   | 5.4 ( 5.1, 5.7)   | 5.3 ( 4.7, 5.9)   | 5.9 ( 5.5, 6.2)   |
| Rotation      | 6.0 ( 6.0, 6.0)   | 6.0 ( 6.0, 6.0)   | 4.9 ( 4.7, 5.2)   | 5.0 ( 4.4, 5.4)   | 5.2 ( 5.0, 5.4)   |
| Exemplar      | 7.0 ( 7.0, 7.0)   | 7.0 ( 7.0, 7.0)   | 6.1 ( 5.8, 6.4)   | 6.0 ( 5.4, 6.4)   | 6.4 ( 6.2, 6.7)   |
| Rel.Pat.Loc   | 8.0 ( 8.0, 8.0)   | 8.0 ( 8.0, 8.0)   | 8.5 ( 8.4, 8.7)   | 8.4 ( 8.0, 8.9)   | 8.7 ( 8.5, 8.9)   |
| Jigsaw        | 9.0 ( 9.0, 9.0)   | 9.0 ( 9.0, 9.0)   | 9.2 ( 8.9, 9.4)   | 9.1 ( 8.6, 9.6)   | 9.5 ( 9.2, 9.8)   |
| Uncond-BigGAN | 10.0 (10.0, 10.0) | 10.0 (10.0, 10.0) | 10.3 (10.1, 10.5) | 10.3 ( 9.9, 10.7) | 10.5 (10.2, 10.7) |
| From-Scratch  | 11.0 (11.0, 11.0) | 12.0 (12.0, 12.0) | 10.9 (10.6, 11.3) | 10.9 (10.5, 11.4) | 11.3 (11.0, 11.5) |
| Cond-BigGAN   | 12.0 (12.0, 12.0) | 11.0 (11.0, 11.0) | 10.6 (10.5, 10.8) | 10.8 (10.4, 11.3) | 10.9 (10.7, 11.1) |
| WAE-MMD       | 13.0 (13.0, 13.0) | 13.6 (13.0, 14.0) | 11.8 (11.6, 12.0) | 11.8 (11.4, 12.3) | 12.1 (11.9, 12.4) |
| VAE           | 14.0 (14.0, 14.0) | 13.4 (13.0, 14.0) | 11.7 (11.5, 11.9) | 11.8 (11.4, 12.2) | 11.9 (11.8, 12.1) |
| WAE-UKL       | 15.1 (15.0, 16.0) | 15.0 (15.0, 15.0) | 14.0 (13.7, 14.3) | 14.0 (13.6, 14.4) | 14.4 (14.2, 14.6) |
| WAE-GAN       | 15.9 (15.0, 16.0) | 16.0 (16.0, 16.0) | 14.4 (14.2, 14.7) | 14.3 (13.9, 14.8) | 14.7 (14.5, 14.9) |

Table 9: VTAB leaderboard with 83.4% interval estimates for the normalized accuracies using the bootstrapped standard errors.

| Model             | Natural           | Specialized       | Structured        | Overall           |
|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Sup-Rotation-100% | 95.6 (95.1, 96.1) | 89.2 (88.3, 90.2) | 81.5 (80.9, 82.2) | 88.4 (87.9, 88.7) |
| Sup-Exemplar-100% | 96.3 (95.8, 96.9) | 92.7 (91.8, 93.9) | 81.8 (81.0, 82.7) | 89.5 (89.0, 90.0) |
| Sup-100%          | 96.0 (95.5, 96.4) | 90.2 (89.2, 91.3) | 73.0 (72.0, 74.0) | 85.1 (84.6, 85.6) |
| Semi-Exemplar-10% | 90.0 (89.6, 90.4) | 88.7 (87.7, 89.5) | 74.7 (73.9, 75.6) | 83.3 (82.9, 83.6) |
| Semi-Rotation-10% | 88.1 (87.6, 88.6) | 90.6 (89.7, 91.6) | 76.4 (75.6, 77.3) | 83.7 (83.3, 84.1) |
| Rotation          | 62.2 (61.7, 62.7) | 78.6 (77.5, 79.6) | 90.6 (89.9, 91.4) | 77.6 (77.3, 78.0) |
| Exemplar          | 54.3 (53.8, 54.8) | 80.8 (79.7, 81.7) | 82.9 (81.9, 83.8) | 71.9 (71.4, 72.4) |
| Rel.Pat.Loc       | 48.7 (48.2, 49.1) | 71.6 (70.6, 72.5) | 62.4 (61.7, 63.3) | 59.3 (58.9, 59.8) |
| Jigsaw            | 45.8 (45.3, 46.3) | 74.0 (73.0, 75.2) | 60.5 (59.7, 61.4) | 57.9 (57.5, 58.3) |
| Uncond-BigGAN     | 34.8 (34.4, 35.3) | 39.0 (37.9, 40.0) | 56.1 (55.3, 56.9) | 44.7 (44.2, 45.2) |
| From-Scratch      | 22.3 (22.0, 22.8) | 63.2 (62.1, 64.3) | 48.5 (47.6, 49.4) | 42.0 (41.5, 42.5) |
| Cond-BigGAN       | 40.2 (39.8, 40.8) | 50.7 (49.5, 51.7) | 27.0 (26.1, 27.8) | 36.8 (36.3, 37.3) |
| WAE-MMD           | 12.0 (11.7, 12.3) | 50.6 (49.7, 51.7) | 44.8 (44.0, 45.4) | 33.9 (33.5, 34.3) |
| VAE               | 9.3 (9.0, 9.7)    | 33.1 (32.0, 34.2) | 50.9 (50.0, 51.9) | 31.8 (31.4, 32.4) |
| WAE-UKL           | 2.0 (1.7, 2.3)    | 39.0 (37.9, 40.0) | 32.0 (31.2, 32.8) | 22.4 (22.0, 22.8) |
| WAE-GAN           | 3.1 (2.9, 3.5)    | 35.7 (34.7, 36.9) | 30.3 (29.4, 31.2) | 21.4 (21.0, 21.9) |

Table 10: Rank aggregation of average normalized accuracy using bootstrapped test data.

| Model         | By avg            | Geom mean         | Avg rank (AvR)    | AvR (noise)       | AvR (bins)        |
|---------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| SR-100%       | 2.0 ( 2.0, 2.0)   | 2.0 ( 2.0, 2.0)   | 3.8 ( 3.6, 4.0)   | 3.9 ( 3.5, 4.2)   | 3.9 ( 3.7, 4.2)   |
| SE-100%       | 1.0 ( 1.0, 1.0)   | 1.0 ( 1.0, 1.0)   | 3.9 ( 3.6, 4.2)   | 3.9 ( 3.6, 4.3)   | 4.1 ( 3.8, 4.4)   |
| Sup-100%      | 3.0 ( 3.0, 3.0)   | 3.0 ( 3.0, 3.0)   | 5.0 ( 4.7, 5.3)   | 5.0 ( 4.5, 5.4)   | 5.2 ( 4.8, 5.6)   |
| Semi-E-10%    | 4.8 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 4.9 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 5.5 ( 5.3, 5.7)   | 5.5 ( 5.1, 5.8)   | 5.6 ( 5.4, 5.8)   |
| Semi-R-10%    | 4.2 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 4.1 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 5.4 ( 5.1, 5.7)   | 5.3 ( 5.0, 5.7)   | 5.6 ( 5.3, 5.9)   |
| Rotation      | 6.0 ( 6.0, 6.0)   | 6.0 ( 6.0, 6.0)   | 4.9 ( 4.7, 5.2)   | 5.0 ( 4.7, 5.2)   | 5.0 ( 4.8, 5.3)   |
| Exemplar      | 7.0 ( 7.0, 7.0)   | 7.0 ( 7.0, 7.0)   | 6.1 ( 5.8, 6.4)   | 6.1 ( 5.7, 6.4)   | 6.2 ( 6.0, 6.5)   |
| Rel.Pat.Loc   | 8.0 ( 8.0, 8.0)   | 8.0 ( 8.0, 8.0)   | 8.5 ( 8.4, 8.7)   | 8.5 ( 8.3, 8.7)   | 8.6 ( 8.4, 8.8)   |
| Jigsaw        | 9.0 ( 9.0, 9.0)   | 9.0 ( 9.0, 9.0)   | 9.2 ( 8.9, 9.4)   | 9.2 ( 8.8, 9.5)   | 9.3 ( 9.1, 9.6)   |
| Uncond-BigGAN | 10.0 (10.0, 10.0) | 10.2 (10.0, 13.4) | 10.3 (10.1, 10.5) | 10.3 (10.0, 10.5) | 10.3 (10.1, 10.6) |
| From-Scratch  | 11.0 (11.0, 11.0) | 10.9 (10.0, 11.0) | 10.9 (10.6, 11.3) | 10.9 (10.7, 11.2) | 11.0 (10.8, 11.3) |
| Cond-BigGAN   | 12.0 (12.0, 12.0) | 13.5 (12.0, 15.8) | 10.6 (10.5, 10.8) | 10.7 (10.5, 10.9) | 10.7 (10.5, 10.8) |
| WAE-MMD       | 13.0 (13.0, 13.0) | 12.2 (11.5, 13.0) | 11.8 (11.6, 12.0) | 11.8 (11.5, 12.1) | 11.9 (11.7, 12.1) |
| VAE           | 14.0 (14.0, 14.0) | 13.4 (12.0, 14.0) | 11.7 (11.5, 11.9) | 11.7 (11.5, 12.0) | 11.8 (11.6, 12.0) |
| WAE-UKL       | 15.0 (15.0, 15.0) | 15.0 (14.0, 16.0) | 14.0 (13.7, 14.3) | 14.0 (13.7, 14.2) | 14.1 (13.8, 14.3) |
| WAE-GAN       | 16.0 (16.0, 16.0) | 15.9 (15.0, 16.0) | 14.4 (14.2, 14.7) | 14.4 (14.1, 14.6) | 14.5 (14.3, 14.7) |

Table 11: Rank aggregation of accuracies using samples from the BHM.

| Model             | By avg            | Geom mean         | Avg rank (AvR)    | AvR (noise)       | AvR (bins)        |
|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Sup-Rotation-100% | 1.1 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 1.4 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 3.8 ( 3.5, 4.2)   | 3.9 ( 3.3, 4.5)   | 4.2 ( 3.8, 4.6)   |
| Sup-Exemplar-100% | 1.9 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 1.6 ( 1.0, 2.0)   | 3.9 ( 3.5, 4.3)   | 4.0 ( 3.4, 4.6)   | 4.5 ( 4.1, 4.9)   |
| Sup-100%          | 3.0 ( 3.0, 3.0)   | 3.0 ( 3.0, 3.0)   | 5.0 ( 4.6, 5.4)   | 5.0 ( 4.4, 5.6)   | 5.5 ( 5.1, 5.9)   |
| Semi-Exemplar-10% | 4.2 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 4.1 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 5.5 ( 5.2, 5.8)   | 5.4 ( 4.8, 6.0)   | 5.9 ( 5.6, 6.3)   |
| Semi-Rotation-10% | 4.8 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 4.9 ( 4.0, 5.0)   | 5.4 ( 5.0, 5.7)   | 5.3 ( 4.7, 5.9)   | 5.9 ( 5.5, 6.3)   |
| Rotation          | 6.0 ( 6.0, 6.0)   | 6.0 ( 6.0, 6.0)   | 4.9 ( 4.7, 5.2)   | 5.0 ( 4.5, 5.4)   | 5.2 ( 4.9, 5.5)   |
| Exemplar          | 7.0 ( 7.0, 7.0)   | 7.0 ( 7.0, 7.0)   | 6.1 ( 5.8, 6.4)   | 6.0 ( 5.5, 6.6)   | 6.4 ( 6.1, 6.7)   |
| Rel.Pat.Loc       | 8.0 ( 8.0, 8.0)   | 8.0 ( 8.0, 8.0)   | 8.5 ( 8.2, 8.7)   | 8.4 ( 7.9, 8.8)   | 8.7 ( 8.4, 8.9)   |
| Jigsaw            | 9.0 ( 9.0, 9.0)   | 9.0 ( 9.0, 9.0)   | 9.2 ( 8.8, 9.5)   | 9.1 ( 8.5, 9.6)   | 9.5 ( 9.2, 9.8)   |
| Uncond-BigGAN     | 10.0 (10.0, 10.0) | 10.0 (10.0, 10.0) | 10.3 (10.0, 10.5) | 10.3 ( 9.8, 10.7) | 10.5 (10.2, 10.7) |
| From-Scratch      | 11.0 (11.0, 11.0) | 12.0 (12.0, 12.0) | 11.0 (10.6, 11.2) | 10.9 (10.4, 11.5) | 11.3 (10.9, 11.5) |
| Cond-BigGAN       | 12.0 (12.0, 12.0) | 11.0 (11.0, 11.0) | 10.7 (10.5, 10.9) | 10.8 (10.4, 11.3) | 10.9 (10.7, 11.2) |
| WAE-MMD           | 13.0 (13.0, 14.0) | 13.5 (13.0, 14.0) | 11.8 (11.5, 12.1) | 11.9 (11.4, 12.4) | 12.1 (11.8, 12.5) |
| VAE               | 14.0 (13.0, 14.0) | 13.5 (13.0, 14.0) | 11.7 (11.5, 11.9) | 11.8 (11.4, 12.2) | 11.9 (11.7, 12.2) |
| WAE-UKL           | 15.1 (15.0, 16.0) | 15.0 (15.0, 15.0) | 14.0 (13.7, 14.3) | 14.0 (13.6, 14.5) | 14.3 (14.0, 14.6) |
| WAE-GAN           | 15.9 (15.0, 16.0) | 16.0 (16.0, 16.0) | 14.4 (14.1, 14.7) | 14.3 (13.8, 14.8) | 14.7 (14.4, 15.0) |