## BackportBench: A Multilingual Benchmark for Automated Backporting of Patches

ZHIQING ZHONG ∗ , The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China JIAMING HUANG ∗ , The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China PINJIA HE † , The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China

Many modern software projects evolve rapidly to incorporate new features and security patches. It is important for users to update their dependencies to safer versions, but many still use older, vulnerable package versions because upgrading can be difficult and may break their existing codebase. Software developers can mitigate this problem by backporting security patches to older releases. However, manually backporting is time-consuming and error-prone. The effectiveness of existing automated backporting techniques on general software remains unclear since they typically target only code-hunk or function-level patch porting scenarios and are evaluated with imperfect metrics.

To facilitate the development and evaluation of automated backporting techniques, we introduce BackportBench, the first comprehensive benchmark suite for patch backporting problem. BackportBench is a multilingual benchmark that contains 202 patch backporting problems from PyPI, Maven, and npm, each with executable Docker environments and relevant test cases. We evaluated existing patch porting methods and LLM-based techniques that have the potential to adapt to this task using BackportBench. The results show that the agentic method has outperformed traditional patch porting methods, especially on cases that require logical and structural changes. However, the performance varies across different programming languages. Based on the findings, we draw several implications for researchers and software practitioners in future work on automated backporting.

CCS Concepts: · Do Not Use This Code → Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper ; Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper ; Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper; Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Do, Not, Use, This, Code, Put, the, Correct, Terms, for, Your, Paper

## ACMReference Format:

Zhiqing Zhong, Jiaming Huang, and Pinjia He. 2018. BackportBench: A Multilingual Benchmark for Automated Backporting of Patches. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation email (Conference acronym 'XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX. XXXXXXX

∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.

† Corresponding author.

Authors' Contact Information: Zhiqing Zhong, zhiqingzhong@link.cuhk.edu.cn, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China; Jiaming Huang, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China, jiaminghuang@link.cuhk.edu.cn; Pinjia He, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China, hepinjia@cuhk.edu.cn.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

Conference acronym 'XX, Woodstock, NY

© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06

[https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX](https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX)

## 1 Introduction

Popular software projects often maintain multiple branches to balance introducing new features with preserving compatibility for existing users [44, 46, 55]. As software evolves, vulnerabilities may emerge, affecting multiple branches and putting their users at risk. Although developers eventually fix these vulnerabilities, patches are often released only for the latest branch, leaving older but still widely used branches unpatched [12]. To remove such vulnerabilities, users must upgrade to a patched version in the latest branch, which can require significant effort to address breaking changes [21, 35, 51]. To alleviate this challenge, patch backporting is a helpful practice that adapts patches for other versions and makes it easier to deliver patches to users on older branches. However, manual backporting is error-prone and time-consuming, often leading to delays or leaving some branches unpatched [8, 40, 46, 56]. Therefore, automated patch backporting is recommended in this situation.

Researchers have proposed several patch porting techniques in recent years [34, 41-43, 56, 63]. Early work relied mainly on predefined patch patterns to backport patches [41, 63]. With the emergence of large language models (LLMs), recent researchers have explored the effectiveness of LLMs on porting patches. For instance, Pan et al. [34] proposed PPatHF, which employs a fine-tuned LLM to adapt patches from functions that have been stripped of irrelevant context to hard fork projects. Wu et al. [56] introduced Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce, an approach that extracts semantic and syntactic signatures to guide a fine-tuned LLM to port patches. Despite these advances, the effectiveness of current patch porting methods on general software packages from open-source software (OSS) ecosystems (e.g., PyPI, Maven, and npm) remains unclear for the following limitations:

- Limitation 1: Existing methods focus on porting patches within local code hunks or functions. Recent research shows that a large portion of backporting involves handling incompatibilities across different files [7]. This suggests that focusing on local code hunks or functions during patch porting is unrealistic, since it curtails the relevant information across files and simplifies the problem.
- Limitation 2: Ad hoc designs reduce generalizability across programming languages and vulnerability types. Some approaches rely on ad hoc designs, such as leveraging unique features provided by Clang/LLVM to transform the source code [41], or curating sink functions to represent vulnerable logic in PHP injection vulnerabilities [43]. While these methods work in certain cases, they are tied to specific languages or vulnerability categories, limiting their broader applicability.
- Limitation 3: Equivalence-based and similarity-based metrics are unstable and not comprehensive for evaluating backporting effectiveness. Most prior work evaluates backported patches by checking whether they are syntactically and semantically equivalent to the human-written ground truth. This process typically requires manual inspection [41, 56], making it labor-intensive, unstable across independent evaluations, and not comprehensive for nonequivalent patches that are actually effective. When such equivalence cannot be achieved, some prior work turns to adopt similarity-based metrics (e.g., edit distance, and CodeBLEU [38]) to measure how similar the backported patches are to the human-written ground truth, which is less effective [37]. We argue that whether backported patches achieve equivalence is not the only way to prove the patch is effective. In many cases, requiring equivalence is too strict, especially when patches require significant adaptation. This perspective is also common in other coding-related tasks [13, 19, 24].

To alleviate these limitations and facilitate the development and evaluation of automated backporting techniques for a more practical scenario, we introduce BackportBench, the first comprehensive benchmark suite for the patch backporting problem. BackportBench contains 202 real-world vulnerability patch backporting task instances curated from three popular OSS ecosystems, PyPI , Maven, and npm, covering Python, Java, and JavaScript, respectively. Consider a situation where a vulnerability affects two versions of a software package, but only one version is patched. BackportBench defines the backporting problem as generating a patch for the unpatched software version based on the existing patch and the code differences between the two versions. This formulation shifts the patch porting problem from code-hunk level or function level to repository level, offering a more realistic representation of software maintenance challenges. To enable stable and comprehensive evaluation, each task instance provides an executable Docker environment with scripts for running relevant test cases, thereby aligns with the criteria for a successful benchmark [5].

Furthermore, we design three research questions to understand how are high-quality backports distributed in the real-world software development, and the potential of existing automated patch porting techniques [34, 56] and GitHub issue resolution techniques [57, 62] on BackportBench. We found that agentic method has outperformed traditional patch porting methods. However, the performance varies across different programming languages.

In summary, we make the following contributions:

- We introduce BackportBench, the first multilingual patch backporting benchmark that includes executable environments and test cases for validation. The BackportBench is available on https://github.com/BackportBench/BackportBench.
- We analyze the distribution of high-quality patch backports in real-world software development.
- We conduct evaluations for not only current patch porting methods, but also LLM-based techniques that have potential to adapt to this task.
- We provide an in-depth discussion of future directions for patch backporting techniques and more applications of BackportBench.

## 2 Related Work

## 2.1 Patch Backporting and Transplantation

Previous studies have unveiled that patch backporting and transplantation are helpful for package users to eliminate security risks in dependencies without adopting their software to a newer major release, but the delay of ported patches and the infrequency of backporting practice significantly weaken this benefit [12, 34, 41]. Therefore, several automated patch backporting techniques were proposed. FixMorph [41] backports patches in Linux kernel to its lower version by synthesizing syntactical transformation rules. TSBPORT [63] backports patches in Linux Kernel by first locating the code hunks to be backported with the program dependency graph, then applying patch migration based on the fine-grained patch type. PatchWeave [42] uses failing test cases and concolic execution to guide patch transplantation between C/C++ libraries. SkyPort [43] focuses on backporting injection vulnerability patches in PHP web frameworks by defining and leveraging a list of sink functions for this type of vulnerability. PPatHF [34] ports patches from source project to its hard fork by removing less relevant content in input function and uses a fine-tuned LLM to adapt the patch to the hard fork. Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce [56] extracts semantic and syntactic function signatures to guide a fine-tuned LLM to port patches in C and Java projects.

However, existing methods face several challenges. First, the design of many of the methods relies on language-specific features, which restricts their applicability to particular languages or even to certain types of vulnerability patches. Second, these methods focus on porting patches within local code hunks or functions. Nevertheless, recent research shows that a large portion of backports involves handling incompatibilities across different files [7]. Third and most importantly, most of these methods evaluate results based on syntactical and semantical equivalence. This typically requires manual inspection, making it difficult to be consistent across independent evaluation in different papers, and labor-instensive. When such equivalence cannot be achieved for difficult cases, some works turn to adopt similarity-based metrics (e.g., edit distance, and CodeBLEU [38]) to measure how similar the backported patch is to human-written ground truth, which is less effective [37].

## 2.2 Repository-level Benchmark for GitHub Issue Resolution

While automated code generation [10, 15, 73] and automated program repair [22, 27, 59] have been long-standing research problems in software engineering, previous benchmarks usually curtail the code context of these problems for simplicity [23]. Recently, several benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate performance on resolving repository-level coding problems. Jimenez et al. [23] proposed SWE-bench, the first GitHub issue resolution benchmark designed to provide a broader set of realworld challenges beyond closed-form code completion. Each challenge in SWE-bench comprises a codebase along with an issue description. Resolving such issues requires editing the codebase so that the related test suite passes. OpenAI released SWE-bench Verified [31], which is a humanvalidated subset of SWE-bench that enables more reliable evaluation. Subsequently, to extend such evaluation beyond Python, SWE-bench-java [67] and Multi-SWE-bench [66] were introduced, covering 7 additional popular programming languages. Guo et al. [17] further introduced OmniGIRL to challenge LLMs with issues whose descriptions include images, collected from repositories across different domains. Nevertheless, existing repository-level benchmarks do not cover patch backporting issues, which typically require understanding two versions of a codebase and the original patch.

## 2.3 LLM-based Methods for GitHub Issue Resolution

Jimenez et al. [23] initially investigated how effective LLMs are at solving GitHub issues by integrating retrieval methods to select files to include in the prompt context. However, even when combined with BM25 retrieval [39] or Oracle retrieval (i.e., directly providing the actual files edited in the ground truth), none of the best-performance models at that time solved more than 5% of the instances in SWE-bench. With the rise of LLM agent applications for other software engineering problems [14, 25, 54, 68], researchers have begun exploring various management strategies for using LLMs to resolve GitHub issues in SWE-bench [4, 16, 45, 47, 52, 57, 61, 62, 71]. Following recent surveys [13, 60], these methods can be grouped into two categories: agentic methods and procedural methods. Agentic methods usually assign decision-making to LLM agents, which devise plans and execute actions to resolve issues. Typical examples include SWE-agent [62], which integrates tools that allow the LLM to interact with the coding environment; AutoCodeRover [71], which improves localization of edited code with a set of AST-based search tools; and SWE-Search [4], a multi-agent framework that incorporates Monte Carlo Tree Search into the agent control loop to improve decisions. Procedural methods require the LLM to follow a fixed pipeline. For example, Agentless [57] performs hierarchical localization for edited code, then generates multiple patches, and selects one using test cases. KGCompass [61] builds a knowledge graph from the codebase, repository issues, and pull requests to facilitate localization, and then proceeds to patch generation and selection. Overall, agentic methods emphasize autonomous decision-making, whereas procedural methods emphasize expert-designed workflows.

## 3 BackportBench Construction

Figure 1 illustrates the overview of our methodology for constructing BackportBench. First, we chose the OSV database [48] and its referenced GitHub commits as data sources, since they allow us to CIVIUIIIICIILO

Data Sources

commit rairs

commit Pairs

rall r alls

ффФ

At

Co Te

→

фф

→

that

age

'ulnerabilities

-0-

-o Ex With more th Re Belong t Included With tes Maven

прш

Fig. 1. Overview of BackportBench construction.

<!-- image -->

mine backporting instances at scale (Section 3.1). Next, we identified potential backporting instances from the above data sources. Specifically, a backporting instance is defined as a pair of commits that patch the same vulnerability in different versions of codebase (Section 3.2). Subsequently, we further confirmed whether the commit pairs truly represent a backporting relationship (Section 3.3) and categorized them based on the level of adaptation required for the backported patches (Section 3.4). Finally, to ensure the confirmed backporting instances are usable for evaluation, we built Docker environments for the backported codebases and validated the quality of their test suites through execution (Section 3.5).

## 3.1 Determining Data Sources

The first challenge to develop BackportBench is finding backporting task instances at scale. Since backporting is an expensive maintenance practice, even many popular repositories do not backport patches to other widely used major versions [12, 70]. Fortunately, we also observe that repositories are more likely to backport patches that address severe issues (e.g., vulnerabilities) [8]. Based on this observation, we focus on vulnerability patches and use OSV database [48] to identify them. OSV is an open source, multi-ecosystem database that is widely adopted by previous research [33, 64, 65], aggregating vulnerabilities from National Vulnerability Database (NVD) [2], GitHub Advisory Database [1], and other sources. Specifically, we focus on vulnerability records from the PyPI, Maven, and npm ecosystems in the 2024.8.29 OSV data dump, where each vulnerability record may include GitHub commit links in its references. These commits may indicate vulnerability patches or their backported patches. We further describe our procedure for identifying backporting data in the next section.

## 3.2 Identifying Potential Backporting Data

The OSV vulnerability records and their linked GitHub commits are noisy, as the records may be duplicated, and the commits may be unrelated to patch backporting. This duplication occurs when OSV aggregates records for the vulnerability from multiple sources. Although each vulnerability record is assigned a unique ID, OSV records include an aliases fi eld that links duplicate records [9].

* De To deduplicate, we group all records linked via aliases as representing the same vulnerability. For each group, we take the union of all GitHub commit links in their references to identify potential backporting data.

From the union of GitHub commits for each vulnerability, we create high-quality commit pairs for further validations. In BackportBench, each backporting task instance consists of two patches: the original patch and its backported patch. Therefore, we first exclude vulnerabilities that have fewer than two GitHub commits in the union. However, some commits may be irrelevant or of low quality. We filter these out and only keep deduplicated vulnerability records with more than one valid commit that meet the following criteria. First, the commit should belong to the affected package in the vulnerability record . Some commits for the dependencies of the affected packages may be included in the references for more detailed information about the vulnerability. Therefore, we filter out GitHub commits that do not belong to the affected packages based on the repository name in the commit and the affected package name in the vulnerability record. Second, the commit should be included in a semantic versioning commit tag . Unlike related benchmarks [20, 28, 29, 66] that only consider code merged into the main branch as accepted by the repository's maintainers, backported patches are often distributed on different branches, which may even be deleted after the release. In this scenario, if a commit is either tagged with a semantic version on GitHub, or is an ancestor of such a tagged commit, this can also indicate that it has been accepted and released by the maintainers. Last but not least, the commit should include changes to both test files and non-test files . This criterion allows us to perform execution-based evaluations for the backporting task. Following previous repository-level benchmarks [17, 23], we consider files that contain testing-related keywords (e.g., "test" and "testing") as test files. Non-code files, such as txt or json files, are excluded from this criterion.

After applying deduplication and the above three filtering criteria, 485 vulnerability records out of 37,284 vulnerability records that have more than one commit are retained. Among these, 216 come from PyPI, 204 from Maven, and 65 from npm. This sharp reduction highlights the scarcity of high-quality backports. Next, we consider all combinations of valid commits in the same vulnerability record as potential backporting task instances. This process produces 1,527 unique commit pairs, which will be validated in the following section to determine whether they truly represent backporting relationships.

## 3.3 Validating Backporting Data

Even after filtering, two commits in the same repository do not necessarily mean they have a backporting relationship. For example, they could be sequential patches for the same vulnerability or completely unrelated commits. To address this, two of our authors independently reviewed all commit pairs, and then compared and discussed any differences in our assessments. Specifically, we examine the commit messages and the code content to determine whether they address the same vulnerability across different versions of the codebase. Some commit pairs represent a sequence of continuous patches for the same vulnerability within the same version, and we exclude these cases. We also exclude commits that contain multiple patches for different vulnerabilities or that are mixed with new features. One thing to note is that, since these commit pairs are initially produced through combinations, some of them may result in meaningless patch pairs. For example, suppose a vulnerability record references three patches, 𝑃 𝑎 , 𝑃 𝑏 , 𝑃 𝑐 , that are retained after all the filtering steps described above. From the commit messages and semantic versioning information, we learn that 𝑃 𝑎 is the original patch, while 𝑃 𝑏 and 𝑃 𝑐 are two backported patches derived from 𝑃 𝑎 . These three patches form three possible pairs: ( 𝑃 𝑎 , 𝑃 𝑏 ) , ( 𝑃 𝑎 , 𝑃 𝑐 ) , and ( 𝑃 𝑏 , 𝑃 𝑐 ) . Only the first two pairs represent actual backport relationships, while the last one does not. When multiple valid patches are associated with the same vulnerability record, we identify the original patch by examining the commit message. If the maintainer explicitly states that a commit is backported from another, we use that information. Otherwise, we compare the semantic versions of the commits and treat the one with the latest version as the original. Once the original patch is determined, we exclude any patch pairs that do not involve it, such as ( 𝑃 𝑏 , 𝑃 𝑐 ) in the example above, to avoid duplication. Following this process, 619 commit pairs are confirmed to represent backport relationships.

## 3.4 Categorizing Backporting Data

During the manual inspection in Section 3.3, we additionally categorize the 619 backport commit pairs based on how much the backported patch differs from its original patch. This provides more insights into how high-quality patch backporting instances are distributed in real-world software development (as further discussed in Section 4.1). Since our filtering ensures that each retained backported patch modifies at least one non-testing file, we perform the categorization at two levels: first at the file level, and then at the content level. At the file level, we focus on how the modified non-test files in the backported patch map to those in the original patches. Based on this comparison, we define five categories that capture differences at the file level.

- Files matched (91.9%): The files modified in the original patch and the backported patch can be matched accordingly;
- Backport adds files (2.4%): The backported patch modifies additional files not touched by the original patch;
- Backport omits files (3.9%): Some files modified in the original patch are not modified in the backported patch;
- Backport adds and omits files (1.3%): The backported patch modifies some additional files, while omitting some files that were modified in the original patch.
- Completely different files (0.5%): The set of modified files in the original patch and the backported patch are completely different.

For categorizing content-level differences in non-test files, we also define five categories, which are similar to prior work [41].

- Nochanges (48.0%): The content of the backported patch and its surrounding code context in the files remain unchanged. In this paper, we define code context from the perspective of the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) concept. If we parse a program into an AST, each code statement becomes a statement node under a function node, a class node, or a program node. For a backported patch, we define its code context as all sibling nodes that share the same parent node, whether that parent is a function, class, or program node.
- Only patch location changes (25.8%): The files or code context related to the backported patch have changed, but the patch content itself remains identical to the original patch. Figure 2(b) illustrates a case where the backported patch content remains unchanged, while the code context of the patch has changed, requiring the patch to be relocated.
- Only namespace changes (1.0%): The backported patch is adapted from the original patch by renaming identifiers such as variables or functions. Figure 2(a) shows an example where the only required modification for the backported patch is related to the namespace. Specifically, the object url\_info changes from a class object to a subscriptable object in the backported codebase, requiring adjustments to how its values are accessed.
- Location &amp; namespace changes (3.4%): The backported patch is adapted from the original patch by modifying both its location and its namespace.
- Logical or structural changes (21.8%): The backported patch is adapted from the original patch by introducing logical or structural changes. Figure 3 shows an example where the original patch fixes a vulnerability by simply adding a missing filter initialization call to a function. In contrast,

<!-- image -->

(a) Only namespace changes

```
lib/unpack.js class UnpackSync extends Unpack { [CHECKFS] (entry) { +       for (const path of this.dirCache.keys()) { +         if (path === entry.absolute || +             path.indexOf(entry.absolute + '/') === 0 || +             path.indexOf(entry.absolute + '\\') === 0) +           this.dirCache.delete(path) Original Patch +     if (entry.type !== 'Directory') { +       } +     } const er = this[MKDIR](path.dirname(entry.absolute), this.dmode, neverCalled) if (er) return this[ONERROR](er, entry) ... ... lib/unpack.js class UnpackSync extends Unpack { [CHECKFS] (entry) { +       for (const path of this.dirCache.keys()) { +         if (path === entry.absolute || +             path.indexOf(entry.absolute + '/') === 0 || +             path.indexOf(entry.absolute + '\\') === 0) +           this.dirCache.delete(path) Backported Patch +     if (entry.type !== 'Directory') { +       } +     } const er = this[MKDIR](path.dirname(entry.absolute), this.dmode) if (er) return this[ONERROR](er, entry) ... ... constructor (opt) { super(opt) }
```

(b) Only location changes

Fig. 2. Showcase of only namespace changes and only location changes.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Showcase of logical or structural changes.

the backported patch must first implement the filter initialization function, since it does not exist in the backported codebase, and its implementation differs from that in the original codebase. In addition, the backported patch adds an extra filter initialization call to another function, while this call already exists in the original codebase.

## 3.5 Execution-Based Validation

Next, we validate the usability of each backporting instance by running its test suite. This process is broken down into three steps. First, to balance manual effort with benchmark size, we select four repositories from each ecosystem and validate all backporting instances within them. Second, we check whether the backported patch can be successfully applied and executed on the backported codebase. Finally, we analyze the execution log of the related test suite for each instance to confirm its usability for evaluation.

For repository selection, we choose a subset rather than all repositories for validation, since building a virtual environment for each backported codebase requires substantial effort. We observed that the setup process is often similar across different versions of the same repository. Based on this observation, we first rank all repositories by the number of confirmed backporting instances and then select the top four from each ecosystem. During setup, however, we fail to set up environments for all backporting instances in a few repositories. In such cases, we exclude those repositories and instead select the next repositories with the highest number of confirmed backporting instances in the corresponding ecosystem. In total, the backporting instances within the twelve repositories we selected account for 51.1% of all confirmed backporting instances.

In the second step, we roll back the codebase to the parent commit of the backported commit. We then set up the environment following the installation instructions for that version of the codebase. Similar to SWE-bench [23], we split the backported patch into a test patch and a gold patch. The test patch contains all modifications to the test files, while the gold patch contains the remaining modifications. We also write test scripts based on the repository's testing instructions. These scripts run all test cases in the files modified by the test patch. To ensure the usability of the test cases, we apply the test patch and execute the test scripts before and after the gold patch is subsequently applied, obtaining the log results 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑒 and 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 separately. If the test scripts run successfully and produce valid test results both before and after the gold patch is applied, we consider the repository to be successfully set up. We discard any backporting instance where all test cases fail both before and after the gold patch is applied, as this suggests that the setup process has failed.

In the third step, we parse 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑒 and 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 to extract the status of each test case. Because the logging format of backporting instances within the same repository is usually consistent, we define one or several regular expression-based log parsers for each repository. These parsers parse the logs and extract the outcome of each test case as either fail or pass . Noting that some test cases are marked as fail because they are executed in either before or after applying the gold patch, but are skipped or missing in the other. We consider a test suite usable if at least one test case changes from fail before the gold patch to pass after it. Backporting instances without such test cases are excluded from our evaluation dataset. Following prior work [23], we also exclude backporting instances where failures before the gold patch are due to ImportError and AttributeError in Python, or Cannot find symbol errors in Java. These errors are typically related to dependency naming issues, which are trivial and nearly impossible to resolve automatically. After the above validation, we record two lists of test cases as evaluation assets for each backporting instance. The first list, FAIL\_TO\_PASS , contains test cases that change from fail to pass . These test cases serve to verify whether the issue in the backporting task instance is solved by the patch. The second list, PASS\_TO\_PASS , contains test cases that remain pass , ensuring that the original functionality of related modules is properly maintained. During evaluation, a backport task is considered resolved if all tests in FAIL\_TO\_PASS and PASS\_TO\_PASS pass.

Overall, we built BackportBench with 202 backporting task instances, where the environments were successfully set up and the usability of their test cases was validated through execution. We present the final breakdown of these validated backporting instances in Figure 4. We also present related attributes of BackportBench instances from each software ecosystem in Table 1.

Fig. 4. Distribution of BackportBench tasks from 12 open source packages across the PyPI, Maven, and npm ecosystems.

<!-- image -->

## 4 Evaluation

In this section, we focus on addressing the following three research questions:

- RQ1: How are high-quality patch backports distributed in real-world software development?
- RQ2: How do LLMs perform on BackportBench?
- RQ3: How do existing patch porting methods perform on BackportBench?

## 4.1 How are high-quality backports distributed in real-world software development?

Since patch backporting, especially those high-quality backports is rare, this RQ examines the distribution of backports to understand when developers adopt this practice. First, we measure the distribution and severity of vulnerabilities that contain high-quality backports. Then we analyze the relationship between backported patches and their original patches.

We found that 30.1% of vulnerability records are in the npm ecosystems, but npm accounts for only 11.5% of the 619 high-quality backports across the three ecosystems. By contrast, PyPI has fewer reported vulnerabilities (27.7% of the total) but contains nearly four times as many high-quality backports as npm (42.7%). Maven account for the remaining 45.9% of high-quality backports. Vulnerabilities that report malicious packages were excluded from these results, since such cases typically suggest package removal rather than patching [49]. For severity, we used the CVSS scores [30] recorded in the OSV vulnerability records from which the backported patches were collected. We found that nearly half (47.0%) of these backported patches address vulnerabilities rated Critical or High severity, which is similar to the proportion of Critical and High severity among all vulnerabilities across the three ecosystems (52.4%).

Regarding the relationship between the backported patches and their original patches, we first categorize and analyze differences in modified files and contents (Section 3.4). Based on that categorization, we then examine the time elapsed between the initial releases of the original and backported patches and the version gap between them. In Section 3.4, we performed the categorization at both file and content levels. At the file-level, 91.9% high-quality backports modify the same files as the original patches. Because most high-quality backports fall into this category, we provide a breakdown of this type in Table 2 for further analysis. We also parse the first Semantic Versioning (SemVer) commit tags that include the patches with a SemVer parser. A SemVer number follows the form MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH . Versions with different MAJOR number indicates incompatible API changes between them, while versions with different MINOR numbers indicate added functionality that remains backward compatible within the same major version train [36]. To calculate the time duration between backported patches and their original patches, we extract the commit date.

Table 1. Average and maximum numbers characterizing different attributes of a BackportBench task instances.

|               |                                       | PyPI         | PyPI         | Maven        | Maven         | npm      | npm        |
|---------------|---------------------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|----------|------------|
|               |                                       | Mean         | Max          | Mean         | Max           | Mean     | Max        |
| Codebase      | # Files (non-test) # Lines (non-test) | 3,538 1,666K | 4,330 1,891K | 2,922 1,218K | 10,000 4,736K | 300 197K | 1,716 451K |
| Original Gold | # Files edited # Lines edited         | 5.8          | 15           | 4.8 47.7     | 24            | 2.8 19.5 | 6 86       |
| Patch         |                                       | 54.8         | 174          |              | 217           |          |            |
| Backported    | # Files edited                        | 4.9          | 15           | 4.9          | 24            | 2.8      | 6          |
| Gold Patch    | # Lines edited                        | 42.4         | 174          | 50.6         | 217           | 21.4     | 98         |
| Tests         | # Fail to Pass                        | 2.2          | 11           | 2.1          | 10            | 3.2      | 6          |

Table 2. Distribution and statistics for 569 high-quality backports whose modified files match the original patches. For each category, we report the number and percentage of backports that were released in a different major version than the original patch, or in a different minor version within the same major version as the original patch. The major-version gap and the release duration are summarized by the mean and the 75th percentile. Three backports that made no changes were released in the same major and minor version as their original patches.

|                 | No Changes   | Only Patch Location   | Only Namespace   | Location & Namespace   | Logical or Structural   |
|-----------------|--------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------------|-------------------------|
| Total           | 297          | 160                   | 6                | 18                     | 88                      |
| Cross Major     | 142 (47.8%)  | 87 (54.4%)            | 4 (66.7%)        | 8 (44.4%)              | 51 (58.0%)              |
| Cross Minor     | 152 (51.2%)  | 73 (45.6%)            | 2 (33.3%)        | 10 (55.6%)             | 37 (42.0%)              |
| Major Gap       | 0.6 / 1.0    | 0.7 / 1.0             | 0.8 / 1.2        | 0.5 / 1.0              | 0.8 / 1.0               |
| Duration (days) | 3.5 / 0.0    | 6.3 / 1.2             | 0.0 / 0.0        | 2.3 / 0.8              | 10.2 / 4.0              |

Table 2 reveals that 95.8% of file-matched backports fall into three content-level categories, in descendingly order by frequency, no-change backports, location-change backports, and logical/structuralchange backports. This ordering suggests a decreasing willingness among developers to perform larger changes when backporting. For these three categories, the proportion of backports that cross major versions increases with the extent the changes, while the proportion that only crosses minor versions within the same major version decreases. This is expected, since larger changes typically reflect greater differences between codebase versions and therefore more likely to introduce incompatibilities. A similar upward trend is observed in the time required for these three categories. Notably, changing only the patch location (without altering content) indeed increases the proportion of backports that cross major versions and the time required. The upward trend is not observed for backports that involve namespace changes, possibly because these cases are rare (4.2%) and lack statistical power. This scarcity aligns with the observation from previous work [41] Regarding major-version gaps, most high-quality backports either stay within the same major versions as their originals or cross into just one additional major version. This finding aligns the nature that maintaining two major-version trains usually captures more than 90% of dependents, founded by a previous study on packages backporting in popular OSS ecosystems [12].

RQ1 Summary: Most high-quality backports come from packages in the PyPI and Maven ecosystems. Patch backporting is less prevalent in the npm ecosystem. 47.0% of the backports address vulnerabilities rated Critical or High severity. As the extent of changes in a backport increases, the number of such backports typically decreases, while the time required and the proportion that cross major versions increase. Most high-quality backports cross into at most one additional major version compared with their originals.

## 4.2 How do LLMs perform on BackportBench?

Setup. With the emergence of LLM techniques on coding tasks, particularly resolving GitHub issues [23, 57, 62], which involves understanding a repository and requirements and then generating a commit, we are interested in exploring their potential for patch backporting as well. Following previous studies [13, 60], current issue resolution approaches could be divided into two categories:

agentic methods and procedural methods. We evaluate one representative method from each category. For the agentic method, we select SWE-agent [62], a widely used open-source agent framework ranked 4th among frameworks whose performance has been checked on SWE-bench Verified [31]. SWE-agent equips an autonomous LLM agent with tools to interact with the codebase environment. In our evaluation, we provide both the original codebase and patch and the backported codebase in the environment, so that SWE-agent can compare them and determine the adaptations needed to backport the patch. For the procedural approach, we select Agentless [57]. Agentless first performs hierarchical localization to identify the relevant files, classes, or functions, and specific edit locations, then generates multiple patches and uses synthesized tests to select the best one. To tailor Agentless to BackportBench tasks, we add the original patches and information from the original codebase (obtained with Agentless's tools for localization) to the prompt. Since Agentless and SWE-agent were originally implemented for Python, we use MagentLess and MSWE-agent, the Java and JavaScript extensions of Agentless and SWE-agent from Multi-SWE-bench [66], for Java and JavaScript backporting tasks. We apply the same prompt adaptations when evaluating MSWE-agent and Magentless on BackportBench instances. In this paper, we use the label (M)SWEagent to refer to SWE-agent when evaluating Python instances and MSWE-agent when evaluating Java and JavaScript instances. Likewise, (M)Agentless denotes Agentless for Python instances and Magentless for Java and JavaScript instances. In addition to (M)SWE-agent and (M)Agentless, we include an Oracle Retrieval method in our evaluation, which is similar to the previous evaluation on repository-level coding tasks studies [17, 23]. This method directly supplies the ground-truth modified files and the original patch as input, simulating a scenario where developers accurately know which files to edit. Including it in the evaluation helps us measure how file localization performance affects repository-level coding tasks. Including this method in the evaluation can help us demystify the impact of file localization accuracy on repository-level coding tasks.

Model Selection. We evaluate three popular LLMs across these three approaches: GPT-5 (GPT5-Chat 2025-09-07) [32], Claude Sonnet 4 (Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514) [3], and Qwen3-Coder (Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct) [50]. These are top-tier models on the SWE-bench Bash Only setting with strong coding capability and long text understanding abilities [23].

Metrics. As mentioned in Section 3.5, a backporting task is considered resolved if all test cases in FAIL\_TO\_PASS (F2P) and PASS\_TO\_PASS (P2P) pass. Based on the evaluation outcome, we further break down the failure cases into five types.

- Generation Failed. This usually occurs because the limited capability of baselines to address the difficult cases and fail in half without a valid output.
- Only F2P Failed. The generated backported patches fail the F2P test cases but pass the P2P test cases.
- Only P2P Failed. The generated backported patches fail the P2P test cases but pass the F2P test cases.
- Both Failed. The generated backported patches fail on both F2P tests and P2P tests.
- Timeout. The generated backported patches fail due to exceeding twice the maximum duration of a single instance run in the Execution-based Validation step of the construction pipeline shown in Figure 1.

Results. We analyze the resolve rates of issue-resolution techniques in BackportBench from three perspectives: programming language, content-level category, and file-level category. Finally, we examine the failure types of the backported patch they generated.

Specifically, Table 3 shows the performance of three baselines on Python, Java, and JavaScript task instances. Among the three baselines, (M)SWE-agent with Claude Sonnet 4 achieves the highest resolve rate on the entire BackportBench (70.8%). This is followed by Oracle Retrieval method with GPT-5 Chat, which achieves 69.8% resolve rate. (M)Agentless with GPT-5 Chat resolves 55.4% of the BackportBench task instances. Compared with (M)Agentless, the Oracle Retrieval method shows certain improvements in resolving backporting tasks. This indicates that localization is one of the bottlenecks for (M)Agentless, especially for JavaScript instances.

Table 3. Resolve rates for GitHub issue-resolution techniques evaluated on BackportBench across different programming languages. In this table, "GPT-5-Chat-Latest (2025-09-07)" is abbreviated as GPT-5, "ClaudeSonnet-4-20250514" as Claude Sonnet 4, and "Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct" as Qwen3-Coder. Baselines with the highest resolve rate in each programming language are bolded.

| (M)SWE-agent     |                       | Python                                        | Java                                      | JavaScript                               | Total                                           |
|------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|                  | GPT-5 Claude Sonnet 4 | 78.6% (88/112) 91.1% (102/112) 82.1% (92/112) | 44.8% (30/67) 46.3% (31/67) 43.3% (29/67) | 34.8% (8/23) 43.5% (10/23) 56.5% (13/23) | 62.4% (126/202) 70.8% (143/202) 66.3% (134/202) |
| (M)Agentless     | GPT-5 Claude Sonnet   | 68.8% (77/112) 56.3% (63/112)                 | 41.8% (28/67) 41.8% (28/67)               | 30.4% (7/23)                             |                                                 |
| (M)Agentless     | Qwen3-Coder           |                                               |                                           |                                          |                                                 |
|                  |                       |                                               |                                           |                                          | 55.4% (112/202)                                 |
|                  | 4                     |                                               |                                           | 13.0% (3/23)                             | 46.5% (94/202)                                  |
|                  | Qwen3-Coder           | 66.1% (74/112)                                | 40.3% (27/67)                             | 13.0% (3/23)                             | 51.5% (104/202)                                 |
| Oracle Retrieval | GPT-5                 | 75.9% (85/112)                                | 62.7% (42/67)                             | 60.9% (14/23)                            | 69.8% (141/202)                                 |
| Oracle Retrieval | Claude Sonnet 4       | 79.5% (89/112)                                | 53.7% (36/67)                             | 60.9% (14/23)                            | 68.8% (139/202)                                 |
| Oracle Retrieval | Qwen3-Coder           | 77.7% (87/112)                                | 56.7% (38/67)                             | 60.9% (14/23)                            | 68.8% (139/202)                                 |

Table 4. Performance comparison across different content-level categories on BackportBench. In this table, "GPT-5-Chat-Latest (2025-09-07)" is abbreviated as GPT-5, "Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514" as Claude Sonnet 4, and "Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct" as Qwen3-Coder.

|              |                 | No Changes           | Only Patch Location   | Only Namespace          | Location & Namespace     | Logical or Structural   |
|--------------|-----------------|----------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|
| (M)SWE-agent | GPT-5           | 61.5% (64/104) 69.2% | 75.9% (41/54)         | 66.7% (2/3) 33.3% (1/3) | 66.7% (6/9) 100.0% (9/9) | 40.6% (13/32) 62.5%     |
| (M)SWE-agent | Claude Sonnet 4 | (72/104)             | 75.9% (41/54)         |                         |                          | (20/32)                 |
| (M)SWE-agent | Qwen3-Coder     | 66.3% (69/104)       | 77.8% (42/54)         | 33.3% (1/3)             | 88.9% (8/9)              | 43.8% (14/32)           |
| (M)Agentless | GPT-5           | 68.3% (71/104)       | 53.7% (29/54)         | 33.3% (1/3)             | 44.4% (4/9)              | 21.9% (7/32)            |
| (M)Agentless | Claude Sonnet 4 | 55.8% (58/104)       | 40.7% (22/54)         | 66.7% (2/3)             | 66.7% (6/9)              | 18.8% (6/32)            |
| (M)Agentless | Qwen3-Coder     | 58.7% (61/104)       | 50.0% (27/54)         | 100.0% (3/3)            | 66.7% (6/9)              | 21.9% (7/32)            |
| Oracle       | GPT-5           | 76.9% (80/104)       | 75.9% (41/54)         | 100.0% (3/3)            | 66.7% (6/9)              | 34.4% (11/32)           |
| Oracle       | Claude Sonnet 4 | 73.1% (76/104)       | 79.6% (43/54)         | 66.7% (2/3)             | 55.6% (5/9)              | 40.6% (13/32)           |
| Oracle       | Qwen3-Coder     | 76.0% (79/104)       | 75.9% (41/54)         | 100.0% (3/3)            | 88.9% (8/9)              | 25.0% (8/32)            |

However, all baselines perform significantly worse on Java instances and JavaScript instances than on Python instances. (M)SWE-agent with Claude Sonnet 4 achieves a high resolve rate of 91.1% on Python instances, but falls sharply to 46.3% on Java and 43.5% on JavaScript instances. This aligns with the findings in Multi-SWE-bench [66], suggesting that the current LLMs and issue-resolution methods struggle to generalize beyond Python, potentially because of differences in language complexity and the characteristics of their task instances.

Table 4 shows the breakdown of the resolved instances for each baseline by content-level category. The results show that (M)Agentless has a decreasing resolve rate for instances that require no changes, only location changes, and logical or structural changes. Meanwhile, Oracle Retrieval maintains a similar resolve rate for instances that need no changes and those that require only patch-location changes. Surprisingly, (M)SWE-agent techniques resolve instances that require changing the patch location even better than those that need no changes. While RQ1 found that modifying only the patch location increases the time required for human developers, indicating greater effort compared with backports that require no changes. In addition, all baselines perform relatively poorly on instances that require logical or structural adaptations. However, (M)SWEagent still achieves a resolve rate of 40.6% to 62.5%, which is the highest among the baselines and two to three times higher than (M)Agentless. This suggests that agentic methods like SWE-agent, which can flexibly plan and execute, are better suited to resolving difficult backporting tasks.

Table 5. Performance comparison across different File-level categories on BackportBench. In this table, "GPT-5-Chat-Latest (2025-09-07)" is abbreviated as GPT-5, "Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514" as Claude Sonnet 4, and "Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct" as Qwen3-Coder.

|                  |                                   | Files Added   | Files Omitted   | Added & Omitted   | No Overlap   |
|------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------|-----------------|-------------------|--------------|
| (M)SWE-agent     | GPT-5 Claude Sonnet 4 Qwen3-Coder | ✓ ✓ ×         | ✓ ✓ ✓           | × × ✓             | × × ×        |
| (M)Agentless     | GPT-5                             | ×             | ✓               | ×                 | ×            |
| (M)Agentless     | Claude Sonnet 4                   | ×             | ×               | ×                 | ×            |
| (M)Agentless     | Qwen3-Coder                       | ×             | ✓               | ×                 | ×            |
| Oracle Retrieval | GPT-5                             | ×             | ✓               | ×                 | ×            |
| Oracle Retrieval | Claude Sonnet 4                   | ✓             | ✓               | ✓                 | ×            |
| Oracle Retrieval | Qwen3-Coder                       | ×             | ✓               | ×                 | ×            |

Except for file-matched task instances, BackportBench only contains one instance per file-level category due to their scarcity. The performance of each baseline on each file-level category (except for file-matched instances) is reported in Table 5. We found that all methods perform well when the files modified in the original patch include the files that need to be modified in the backported patch. In addition, (M)SWE-agent can sometimes resolve cases where the modified files overlap between the original patch and the backported patches.

Finally, we examine the failure types for all issue-resolution approaches on BackportBench. Table 6 shows that the majority of failures are due to failing F2P or P2P tests, indicating the generated backported patches are ineffective. However, (M)Agentless and Oracle Retrieval failed to generate a valid patch in 23.0%-41.7% of cases. This is mainly because these methods fail to complete the procedure or to match the formatting in the procedure, and they lack a dynamic reflect-and-retry mechanism.

RQ2 Summary: Existing issue-resolution methods successfully resolve 70.8% of backport instances, but performance varies significantly across programming languages. All methods generally perform worse as the extent of required change increases, while (M)SWE-agent performs better on instances that require changing the patch location than on those that need no changes. The majority of the failures are caused by failing test cases, and (M)Agentless and Oracle Retrieval methods fail to generate valid patches in a notable share of instances.

Table 6. The failure types of issue resolution techniques on BackportBench. In this table, "GPT-5-Chat-Latest (2025-09-07)" is abbreviated as GPT-5, "Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514" as Claude Sonnet 4, and "Qwen3-Coder480B-A35B-Instruct" as Qwen3-Coder. Failure types with highest frequency for each baseline are bolded.

|              |                 | Generation Failed   | Only F2P Failed   | Only P2P Failed   | Both Failed   | Timeout      |
|--------------|-----------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------------|---------------|--------------|
| (M)SWE-agent | GPT-5           | 13.2% (10/76)       | 39.5% (30/76)     | 38.2% (29/76)     | 6.6% (5/76)   | 2.6% (2/76)  |
| (M)SWE-agent | Claude Sonnet 4 | 20.3% (12/59)       | 64.4% (38/59)     | 6.8% (4/59)       | 5.1% (3/59)   | 3.4% (2/59)  |
| (M)SWE-agent | Qwen3-Coder     | 29.4% (20/68)       | 36.8% (25/68)     | 22.1% (15/68)     | 7.4% (5/68)   | 4.4% (3/68)  |
| (M)Agentless | GPT-5           | 28.9% (26/90)       | 35.6% (32/90)     | 32.2% (29/90)     | 2.2% (2/90)   | 1.1% (1/90)  |
| (M)Agentless | Claude Sonnet 4 | 41.7% (45/108)      | 33.3% (36/108)    | 18.5% (20/108)    | 5.6% (6/108)  | 0.9% (1/108) |
| (M)Agentless | Qwen3-Coder     | 34.7% (34/98)       | 39.8% (39/98)     | 18.4% (18/98)     | 7.1% (7/98)   | 0.0%(0/98)   |
| Oracle       | GPT-5           | 23.0% (14/61)       | 42.6% (26/61)     | 31.1% (19/61)     | 1.6% (1/61)   | 1.6% (1/61)  |
| Oracle       | Claude Sonnet 4 | 33.3% (21/63)       | 30.2% (19/63)     | 30.2% (19/63)     | 4.8% (3/63)   | 1.6% (1/63)  |
| Oracle       | Qwen3-Coder     | 33.3% (21/63)       | 31.7% (20/63)     | 25.4% (16/63)     | 7.9% (5/63)   | 1.6% (1/63)  |

## 4.3 How do existing patch porting methods perform on BackportBench?

As we mentioned in Section 2.1, most of the previous methods focus on porting patches in C. Among which only Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce and PPatHF are compatible with Java project [34, 56]. Therefore, we evaluate the performance of these two prior patch porting methods on the Java task instances in BackportBench. Since these two methods were originally designed for function-level tasks, we extract the related modules that include functions from the original patches and the backported patches following their input format. Then we iteratively generate the backported patch for each function and merge them.

Similar to RQ2, we use the resolve rate on F2P and P2P test cases to evaluate the generated backported patches, and break down the resolved cases by content-level categories. We also analyze the failure types of Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce and PPatHF.

Table 7 shows the performance of PPatHF and Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce on backport instances across contentlevel categories and compares them with the MSWE-agent. The results show that Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce, the previous state-of-the-art method for patch porting, can resolve 40.3% of Java task instances, while MSWE-agent with GPT-5 Chat can resolve 46.3%, a 15% relative improvement over Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce. The other baseline, PPatHF can resolve only a single no-change instance.

We further examine the specific categories of instances they resolved. The results show that Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce resolves 55.8% of the no-change instances, which is one more case than the best MSWEagent setting (Claude Sonnet 4). Nevertheless, when the tasks become slightly more complex and require location changes, the resolve rate of Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce falls significantly to 22.2%, resolving only 2 of 9 instances. By contrast, MSWE-agent with GPT-5 Chat and with Qwen3-Coder-480B resolve 7 (77.8%) and 6 (66.7%) of those instances, respectively. For the most difficult cases that require logical or structural changes, Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce resolves only 1 instance (7.7%). While MSWE-agent with Claude Sonnet 4 and with GPT-5 Chat can still manage to resolve 5 (38.5%) and 4 (30.8%) instances, respectively.

Similar to Section 4.2, we further look into the failure report in Table 8 to find more insights on how PPatHF and Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce failed. We found that most (84.8%) of PPatHF's failures are due to generation failure. Specifically, misaligning the target path or not finding the corresponding function between the original and the backported patch. But PPatHF often overlooks the diverse reasons for LLM porting failure, which hinders further patch adaptation and leads to unsuccessful patching. Moreover, PPatHF relies on LLM fine-tuning, which is unable to proceed due to the limited number of BackportBench, thereby reducing its effectiveness across the backporting task and the Java language. Those factors ultimately affect the evaluation results of PPatHF.

Table 7. The resolve rate of exiting patch porting methods compared with MSWE-agent on Java instances across different content-level categories. Noted that there is no Java task instance that belongs to Location &amp; Namespace changes. In this table, MSWE.GPT5 is short for MSWE-agent with GPT-5-Chat-Latest (2025-09-07), MSWE.Claude4 is short for MSWE-agent with Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514, and MSWE.Qwen3 is short for MSWE-agent with Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct. The highest resolve rate for each category is bolded.

|                  | No Changes    | Only Patch Location   | Only Namespace   | Location & Namespace   | Logical or Structural   | Total         |
|------------------|---------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------------|-------------------------|---------------|
| PPatHF           | 2.3% (1/43)   | 0.0% (0/9)            | 0.0% (0/2)       | N/A                    | 0.0% (0/13)             | 1.5% (1/67)   |
| Mysti/q.sc_u.sce | 58.1% (25/43) | 22.2% (2/9)           | 0.0% (0/2)       | N/A                    | 7.7% (1/13)             | 41.8% (28/67) |
| MSWE.GPT5        | 41.9% (18/43) | 77.8% (7/9)           | 50.0% (1/2)      | N/A                    | 30.8% (4/13)            | 44.8% (30/67) |
| MSWE.Claude4     | 53.5% (23/43) | 33.3% (3/9)           | 0.0% (0/2)       | N/A                    | 38.5% (5/13)            | 46.3% (31/67) |
| MSWE.Qwen3       | 48.8% (21/43) | 66.7% (6/9)           | 0.0% (0/2)       | N/A                    | 15.4% (2/13)            | 43.3% (29/67) |

Table 8. The failure types of existing patch porting methods on Java instances .

|                  | Generation Failed   | Only F2P Failed   | Only P2P Failed   | Both Failed   | Timeout     |
|------------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------------|---------------|-------------|
| PPatHF           | 84.8% (56/66)       | 10.6% (7/66)      | 0.0% (0/66)       | 1.5% (1/66)   | 3.0% (2/66) |
| Mysti/q.sc_u.sce | 12.8% (5/39)        | 5.1% (2/39)       | 74.4% (29/39)     | 0.0% (0/39)   | 7.7% (3/39) |

Interestingly, the failure report for Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce shows that although it can successfully generate the backported patches for most cases and subsequently pass the F2P test cases, most of its failure are due to failing on P2P test cases. This implies that the backported patches it generates are likely to break the original functionality of the modified classes. However, this negative impact is ignored by all the previously patch porting methods that use equivalence-based or similarity-based as evaluation metric [34, 41, 42, 56, 63]. We believe that it is because Mysti/q.sc\_u.sce adopts a function-level backporting design that does not consider the context across the functions within the same file and context across files.

RQ3 Summary: Previous state-of-the-art patch porting method can resolve half of the nochanges Java backporting tasks, but still lack the capability to resolve more complicated cases even only the patch location should modified.

## 5 Discussion

## 5.1 Implications for Researchers

This benchmark serves as the first comprehensive repository-level, multilingual benchmark that evaluates the effectiveness of patch backporting techniques. In our evaluation, we found that both issue-resolution techniques and previous patch porting techniques perform relatively poorly at tasks that need logical or structural changes, indicating a major challenge that future research on developing patch backporting techniques needs to focus on. Nevertheless, the amount of such task instances in BackportBench is low, since developers typically need to take more time and resources on such cases and relatively have less willingness to perform such backporting. To facilitate the automated patch backporting techniques as reliable techniques in real-world software development, future research on this topic should also try to extend Benchmark with more difficult cases to ensure a more diverse evaluation of these techniques.

Beyond patch backporting, BackportBench can also be used to evaluate repository-level code evolution and migration. Patch backporting, code migration, and code evolution share common automation challenges: identifying changes and incompatibilities between versions, and adapting code to the target version. However, no existing evaluation method for these tasks covers repositorylevel scenarios and multiple programming languages simultaneously [11, 26]. Future research on repository-level code evolution and migration can integrate BackportBench for more comprehensive evaluation.

From the results of RQ2, we found that the agentic approach (represented by SWE-agent) outperforms the procedural approach on backporting tasks, potentially due to the dynamic reflectionand-retry mechanism. In addition, existing procedural methods do not adequately support LLMs in comparing and understanding how a codebase evolves versions, and subsequently fail to determine the adaptation needed for backporting patches. We suggest future research on automated patch backporting add more support for comparing the differences between different codebase versions.

Regarding the applications of patch backporting techniques, we suggest that researchers further explore whether smoother vulnerability patch propagation to software users can really be achieved with the development of future automated backporting techniques. As recent research [53, 72] discussed, whenever a vulnerability is found and fixed in a software package, its downstream users have difficulties upgrading to the patched versions as they are typically versions in different major version trains. Upgrading may need to address incompatibility issues, which may be impossible for unmaintained dependent packages. Future research on automated backporting techniques can validate whether deploying these generated backported patches to a backward-compatible release can really help the users of vulnerable packages upgrade smoothly, subsequently remove the vulnerability without introducing incompatibilities.

## 5.2 Implication for Software Practitioners

For software practitioners, the finding in Section 4.3 suggests that test cases for validating the backported patches should be included while performing backporting. As software developers usually backport patches completely based on the original patches, which could introduce inconsistency between the patched code and the context across versions [58]. We suggest that the developers should carefully test the backported patches even when the surrounding code context looks similar.

## 6 Threats to Validity

## 6.1 Internal Validity

This paper suffers from several internal threats. First, like previous repository-level coding benchmarks [17, 66] that rely on manual construction of executable environments, the environments we build may not exactly match those that existed when developers performed backporting. This is mainly due to the loose version constraints on package dependencies and system dependencies, which can cause different versions to be installed over time, and to insufficient documentation and guidelines. However, we validate the usability of each task instance by running tests, which should mitigate the impact of inconsistent environment reproduction. In addition, all BackportBench task instances are released as Docker containers with all dependencies installed, which facilitates consistent evaluation in future research. Second, throughout the BackportBench construction, we tried to collect as much realistic backport data as possible. However, due to the scarcity of high-quality backports, many of them were conducted predate the LLM's knowledge cutoff date, which may introduce data contamination into the evaluation results. To mitigate this, we open-source our data collection and curation code to facilitate dynamic updates for BackportBench. Inspired by recent work [18, 69], we plan to develop automated approaches to identify and construct backport instances, further reducing the manual effort required for live updates to BackportBench in the future.

## 6.2 External Validity

As shown in Section 4.2, agents that use different LLMs can vary in their patch-backporting performance on different programming languages. This variation could limit the generalizability of our findings. To mitigate this threat, we constructed BackportBench using data collected from the three most popular programming languages [6]. Each of these languages has a large software ecosystem with hundreds of thousands of reusable packages, so we believe this selection covers the most common patch-backporting scenarios. The conclusion about existing approaches' performance may also depend on the packages used for evaluation. This is because each package follows its own maintenance strategy and tends to perform similar types of backports (for example, making no code changes) across a specific range of versions, which can bias the results. To increase the diversity and obtain sufficient task instances, we construct task instances from 12 repositories spanning three programming languages.

## 7 Conclusion

In this paper, we present BackportBench, the first patch backporting benchmark suite comprising 202 real-world patch backporting problems curated from PyPI, Maven, and npm. BackportBench reframes the evaluation of patch backporting by using execution-based testing. Using BackportBench, we evaluate three widely used GitHub issue-resolution approaches with three state-of-the-art LLMs, along with two existing patch porting methods, and report several notable findings. We also provide an in-depth discussion of implications for both researchers and software practitioners.

## 8 Data Availability

Thecodeanddata of BackportBench are available at https://github.com/BackportBench/BackportBench.

## References

- [1] 2025. GitHub Advisory Database: Security vulnerability database inclusive of CVEs and GitHub originated security advisories from the world of open source software. Retrieved August 21, 2025 from https://github.com/github/advisorydatabase/
- [2] 2025. National Vulnerability Database. Retrieved August 21, 2025 from https://nvd.nist.gov/
- [3] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Sonnet 4. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from https://www.anthropic.com/claude/sonnet
- [4] Antonis Antoniades, Albert Örwall, Kexun Zhang, Yuxi Xie, Anirudh Goyal, and William Wang. 2024. Swe-search: Enhancing software agents with monte carlo tree search and iterative refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20285 (2024).
- [5] Masudul Hasan Masud Bhuiyan, Adithya Srinivas Parthasarathy, Nikos Vasilakis, Michael Pradel, and CristianAlexandru Staicu. 2023. SecBench. js: An executable security benchmark suite for server-side JavaScript. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 1059-1070.
- [6] Stephen Cass. 2024. The Top Programming Language 2024. Retrieved September 11, 2025 from https://spectrum.ieee. org/top-programming-languages-2024
- [7] Debasish Chakroborti, Chanchal Roy, and Kevin Schneider. 2024. A Study of Backporting Code in Open-Source Software for Characterizing Changesets. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings . 296-297.
- [8] Debasish Chakroborti, Kevin A Schneider, and Chanchal K Roy. 2022. Backports: Change types, challenges and strategies. In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehension . 636-647.
- [9] Oliver Chang and Russ Cox. 2025. Open Source Vulnerability format. Retrieved August 21, 2025 from https: //ossf.github.io/osv-schema/#aliases-field

- [10] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
- [11] Keyuan Cheng, Xudong Shen, Yihao Yang, Tengyue Wang, Yang Cao, Muhammad Asif Ali, Hanbin Wang, Lijie Hu, and Di Wang. 2025. Codemenv: Benchmarking large language models on code migration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00894 (2025).
- [12] Alexandre Decan, Tom Mens, Ahmed Zerouali, and Coen De Roover. 2021. Back to the past-analysing backporting practices in package dependency networks. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 48, 10 (2021), 4087-4099.
- [13] Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Jiaru Qian, Tian Wang, Kechi Zhang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2025. A Survey on Code Generation with LLM-based Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00083 (2025).
- [14] Robert Feldt, Sungmin Kang, Juyeon Yoon, and Shin Yoo. 2023. Towards autonomous testing agents via conversational large language models. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 1688-1693.
- [15] Joel Galenson, Philip Reames, Rastislav Bodik, Björn Hartmann, and Koushik Sen. 2014. Codehint: Dynamic and interactive synthesis of code snippets. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering . 653-663.
- [16] Pengfei Gao, Zhao Tian, Xiangxin Meng, Xinchen Wang, Ruida Hu, Yuanan Xiao, Yizhou Liu, Zhao Zhang, Junjie Chen, Cuiyun Gao, et al. 2025. Trae Agent: An LLM-based Agent for Software Engineering with Test-time Scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23370 (2025).
- [17] Lianghong Guo, Wei Tao, Runhan Jiang, Yanlin Wang, Jiachi Chen, Xilin Liu, Yuchi Ma, Mingzhi Mao, Hongyu Zhang, and Zibin Zheng. 2025. Omnigirl: A multilingual and multimodal benchmark for github issue resolution. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 2, ISSTA (2025), 24-46.
- [18] Lianghong Guo, Yanlin Wang, Caihua Li, Pengyu Yang, Jiachi Chen, Wei Tao, Yingtian Zou, Duyu Tang, and Zibin Zheng. 2025. SWE-Factory: Your Automated Factory for Issue Resolution Training Data and Evaluation Benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10954 (2025).
- [19] Junda He, Christoph Treude, and David Lo. 2025. LLM-Based Multi-Agent Systems for Software Engineering: Literature Review, Vision, and the Road Ahead. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 34, 5 (2025), 1-30.
- [20] Ruida Hu, Chao Peng, Jingyi Ren, Bo Jiang, Xiangxin Meng, Qinyun Wu, Pengfei Gao, Xinchen Wang, and Cuiyun Gao. 2024. A Real-World Benchmark for Evaluating Fine-Grained Issue Solving Capabilities of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18019 (2024).
- [21] Dhanushka Jayasuriya, Valerio Terragni, Jens Dietrich, Samuel Ou, and Kelly Blincoe. 2023. Understanding breaking changes in the wild. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 1433-1444.
- [22] Jiajun Jiang, Yingfei Xiong, Hongyu Zhang, Qing Gao, and Xiangqun Chen. 2018. Shaping program repair space with existing patches and similar code. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on software testing and analysis . 298-309.
- [23] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 (2023).
- [24] Kefan Li, Yuan Yuan, Hongyue Yu, Tingyu Guo, and Shijie Cao. 2025. CoCoEvo: Co-Evolution of Programs and Test Cases to Enhance Code Generation. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2025).
- [25] Junwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, Zhenpeng Chen, Lingming Zhang, and Yiling Lou. 2024. Large language model-based agents for software engineering: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02977 (2024).
- [26] Linbo Liu, Xinle Liu, Qiang Zhou, Lin Chen, Yihan Liu, Hoan Nguyen, Behrooz Omidvar-Tehrani, Xi Shen, Jun Huan, Omer Tripp, et al. 2025. MigrationBench: Repository-Level Code Migration Benchmark from Java 8. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09569 (2025).
18. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
- [27] Martin Monperrus. 2018. Automatic software repair: A bibliography. 51, 1 (2018), 1-24.
- [28] Niels Mündler, Mark Müller, Jingxuan He, and Martin Vechev. 2024. SWT-bench: Testing and validating real-world bug-fixes with code agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 81857-81887.
- [29] Noor Nashid, Islem Bouzenia, Michael Pradel, and Ali Mesbah. 2025. Issue2Test: Generating Reproducing Test Cases from Issue Reports. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16320 (2025).
- [30] NVD. 2025. NVD - Vulnerability Metrics. Retrieved September 5, 2025 from https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln-metrics/cvss
- [31] OpenAI. 2024. Introducing SWE-bench Verified. Retrieved August 21, 2025 from https://openai.com/index/introducingswe-bench-verified/
- [32] OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-5. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/
- [33] Shengyi Pan, Lingfeng Bao, Jiayuan Zhou, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, and Shanping Li. 2024. Towards more practical automation of vulnerability assessment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering .

## 1-13.

- [34] Shengyi Pan, You Wang, Zhongxin Liu, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, and Shanping Li. 2024. Automating zero-shot patch porting for hard forks. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 363-375.
- [35] Ivan Pashchenko, Duc-Ly Vu, and Fabio Massacci. 2020. A qualitative study of dependency management and its security implications. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security . 1513-1531.
- [36] Tom Preston-Werner. 2025. Semantic Versioning 2.0.0. Retrieved September 5, 2025 from https://semver.org/
- [37] Baishakhi Ray and Miryung Kim. 2012. A case study of cross-system porting in forked projects. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 1-11.
- [38] Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sundaresan, Ming Zhou, Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. 2020. Codebleu: a method for automatic evaluation of code synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.10297 (2020).
- [39] Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval 3, 4 (2009), 333-389.
- [40] Luis R Rodriguez and Julia Lawall. 2015. Increasing automation in the backporting of Linux drivers using Coccinelle. In 2015 11th European Dependable Computing Conference (EDCC) . IEEE, 132-143.
- [41] Ridwan Shariffdeen, Xiang Gao, Gregory J Duck, Shin Hwei Tan, Julia Lawall, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2021. Automated patch backporting in Linux (experience paper). In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 633-645.
- [42] Ridwan Salihin Shariffdeen, Shin Hwei Tan, Mingyuan Gao, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2020. Automated patch transplantation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 30, 1 (2020), 1-36.
- [43] Youkun Shi, Yuan Zhang, Tianhan Luo, Xiangyu Mao, Yinzhi Cao, Ziwen Wang, Yudi Zhao, Zongan Huang, and Min Yang. 2022. Backporting security patches of web applications: A prototype design and implementation on injection vulnerability patches. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22) . 1993-2010.
- [44] Emad Shihab, Christian Bird, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2012. The effect of branching strategies on software quality. In Proceedings of the ACM-IEEE international symposium on Empirical software engineering and measurement . 301-310.
- [45] Hongjin Su, Ruoxi Sun, Jinsung Yoon, Pengcheng Yin, Tao Yu, and Sercan Ö Arık. 2025. Learn-by-interact: A data-centric framework for self-adaptive agents in realistic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10893 (2025).
- [46] Xin Tan, Yuan Zhang, Jiajun Cao, Kun Sun, Mi Zhang, and Min Yang. 2022. Understanding the practice of security patch management across multiple branches in oss projects. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022 . 767-777.
- [47] Wei Tao, Yucheng Zhou, Yanlin Wang, Wenqiang Zhang, Hongyu Zhang, and Yu Cheng. 2024. Magis: Llm-based multi-agent framework for github issue resolution. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 51963-51993.
- [48] OSV Team. 2025. A distributed vulnerability database for Open Source. Retrieved August 21, 2025 from https://osv.dev/
- [49] OSV Team. 2025. OpenSSF Malicious Packages. Retrieved September 5, 2025 from https://github.com/ossf/maliciouspackages
- [50] Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. arXiv:2505.09388 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388
- [51] Daniel Venturini, Filipe Roseiro Cogo, Ivanilton Polato, Marco A Gerosa, and Igor Scaliante Wiese. 2023. I depended on you and you broke me: An empirical study of manifesting breaking changes in client packages. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 32, 4 (2023), 1-26.
- [52] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. 2024. Openhands: An open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 (2024).
- [53] Ying Wang, Peng Sun, Lin Pei, Yue Yu, Chang Xu, Shing-Chi Cheung, Hai Yu, and Zhiliang Zhu. 2023. Plumber: Boosting the propagation of vulnerability fixes in the npm ecosystem. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 5 (2023), 3155-3181.
- [54] Yanlin Wang, Wanjun Zhong, Yanxian Huang, Ensheng Shi, Min Yang, Jiachi Chen, Hui Li, Yuchi Ma, Qianxiang Wang, and Zibin Zheng. 2025. Agents in software engineering: Survey, landscape, and vision. Automated Software Engineering 32, 2 (2025), 1-36.
- [55] Laura Wingerd and Christopher Seiwald. 1998. High-level best practices in software configuration management. In International Workshop on Software Configuration Management . Springer, 57-66.
- [56] Susheng Wu, Ruisi Wang, Yiheng Cao, Bihuan Chen, Zhuotong Zhou, Yiheng Huang, JunPeng Zhao, and Xin Peng. 2025. Mystique: Automated Vulnerability Patch Porting with Semantic and Syntactic-Enhanced LLM. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 2, FSE (2025), 130-152.
- [57] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Agentless: Demystifying llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489 (2024).

- [58] Zifan Xie, Ming Wen, Zichao Wei, and Hai Jin. 2024. Unveiling the Characteristics and Impact of Security Patch Evolution. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . 1094-1106.
- [59] Junjielong Xu, Ying Fu, Shin Hwei Tan, and Pinjia He. 2024. Aligning llms for fl-free program repair. CoRR (2024).
- [60] Boyang Yang, Zijian Cai, Fengling Liu, Bach Le, Lingming Zhang, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, Yang Liu, and Haoye Tian. 2025. A Survey of LLM-based Automated Program Repair: Taxonomies, Design Paradigms, and Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23749 (2025).
- [61] Boyang Yang, Haoye Tian, Jiadong Ren, Shunfu Jin, Yang Liu, Feng Liu, and Bach Le. 2025. Enhancing Repository-Level Software Repair via Repository-Aware Knowledge Graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21710 (2025).
- [62] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 50528-50652.
- [63] Su Yang, Yang Xiao, Zhengzi Xu, Chengyi Sun, Chen Ji, and Yuqing Zhang. 2023. Enhancing oss patch backporting with semantics. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 2366-2380.
- [64] Corey Yang-Smith and Ahmad Abdellatif. 2025. Tracing vulnerabilities in maven: a study of cve lifecycles and dependency networks. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 22nd International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, 349-353.
- [65] Nusrat Zahan, Shohanuzzaman Shohan, Dan Harris, and Laurie Williams. 2023. Do software security practices yield fewer vulnerabilities?. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP) . IEEE, 292-303.
- [66] Daoguang Zan, Zhirong Huang, Wei Liu, Hanwu Chen, Linhao Zhang, Shulin Xin, Lu Chen, Qi Liu, Xiaojian Zhong, Aoyan Li, et al. 2025. Multi-swe-bench: A multilingual benchmark for issue resolving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02605 (2025).
- [67] Daoguang Zan, Zhirong Huang, Ailun Yu, Shaoxin Lin, Yifan Shi, Wei Liu, Dong Chen, Zongshuai Qi, Hao Yu, Lei Yu, et al. 2024. Swe-bench-java: A github issue resolving benchmark for java. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14354 (2024).
- [68] Chaoyun Zhang, Shilin He, Jiaxu Qian, Bowen Li, Liqun Li, Si Qin, Yu Kang, Minghua Ma, Guyue Liu, Qingwei Lin, et al. 2024. Large language model-brained gui agents: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18279 (2024).
- [69] Linghao Zhang, Shilin He, Chaoyun Zhang, Yu Kang, Bowen Li, Chengxing Xie, Junhao Wang, Maoquan Wang, Yufan Huang, Shengyu Fu, et al. 2025. SWE-bench Goes Live! arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23419 (2025).
- [70] Lyuye Zhang, Chengwei Liu, Sen Chen, Zhengzi Xu, Lingling Fan, Lida Zhao, Yiran Zhang, and Yang Liu. 2023. Mitigating persistence of open-source vulnerabilities in maven ecosystem. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 191-203.
- [71] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 1592-1604.
- [72] Zhiqing Zhong, Shilin He, Haoxuan Wang, Boxi Yu, Haowen Yang, and Pinjia He. 2025. An Empirical Study on PackageLevel Deprecation in Python Ecosystem. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 66-77.
- [73] Terry Yue Zhuo, Minh Chien Vu, Jenny Chim, Han Hu, Wenhao Yu, Ratnadira Widyasari, Imam Nur Bani Yusuf, Haolan Zhan, Junda He, Indraneil Paul, et al. 2024. Bigcodebench: Benchmarking code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15877 (2024).

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009