## FraudFox : Adaptable Fraud Detection in the Real World

Matthew Butler 1 , Yi Fan 1 , and Christos Faloutsos 1 , 2

1 Amazon.com, Inc., 410 Terry Ave N, Seattle WA 98109, U.S.A.

{ matbutle,fnyi } @amazon.com

Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, U.S.A. { faloutso } @amazon.com

2

Abstract. The proposed method (FraudFox) provides solutions to adversarial attacks in a resource constrained environment. We focus on questions like the following:

How suspicious is 'Smith', trying to buy $ 500 shoes, on Monday 3am? How to merge the risk scores, from a handful of risk-assessment modules ('oracles') in an adversarial environment? More importantly, given historical data (orders, prices, and what-happened afterwards), and business goals/restrictions, which transactions, like the 'Smith' transaction above, which ones should we 'pass', versus send to human investigators? The business restrictions could be: 'at most x investigations are feasible', or 'at most $ y lost due to fraud'. These are the two research problems we focus on, in this work.

One approach to address the first problem ('oracle-weighting'), is by using Extended Kalman Filters with dynamic importance weights, to automatically and continuously update our weights for each 'oracle'. For the second problem, we show how to derive an optimal decision surface, and how to compute the Pareto optimal set, to allow what-if questions. An important consideration is adaptation: Fraudsters will change their behavior, according to our past decisions; thus, we need to adapt accordingly.

The resulting system, FraudFox , is scalable, adaptable to changing fraudster behavior, effective, and already in production at Amazon. FraudFox augments a fraud prevention sub-system and has led to significant performance gains.

Keywords: fraud detection · kalman filters · adversarial learning · ensemble modeling

## 1 Introduction

Transactional fraud management is essential for ecommerce. The resulting 'arms race' is the first issue that the proposed FraudFox tackles. The second issue, is non-adversarial changes: the business rules/constraints do change over time, e.g., next month we may want to increase (or reduce) the number of investigations.

I $ loss FraudFox added to the

| production system

10

12

' System without FraudFox

Savings

System with FraudFox

Fig. 1: Business Impact of FraudFox : Visible loss reduction when applying it to real word data. Losses vs. time - 1st without dynamically blending a subset of fraud indicators (blue), i.e., without FraudFox ; 2nd with dynamically blending (orange), i.e. with FraudFox introduced at the dashed-black time tick.

<!-- image -->

The proposed FraudFox handles this issue, too, by carefully pre-computing a set of 'good' solutions.

Next we address the specifications of the ADS track of the venue:

Deployed : The system is operational (see Figure 1)

Real world challenge: Spotting fraudsters is a major problem in e-retailers. The specific challenges we focus on, are the following two: (a) how to detect fraudsters that are behaving adversarially, i.e. that are carefully trying to avoid detection. (b) how to handle changing business constraints (like number of available human investigators).

Methodology - novelty : For the first challenge, we propose an extended Kalman filter, with exponential decay (see Theorem 1 on page 9), so that it adapts to changing fraudster tactics. For the second challenge, we propose a decision surface (see Lemma 4 on page 10) and state-of-the-art optimization with PSO (particle swarm optimization), to estimate the Pareto front (see section 7).

Business impact : FraudFox is in production, making a clear impact (see Figure 1).

We elaborate on the main problem and its subproblems.

At the high level, we want to make pass/investigate decisions automatically, for each order like the 'Smith' order above, while adapting to both

- -the (adversarially) changing behavior of fraudsters and
- -the (non-adversarially) changing business constraints (eg., ' x more investigators are available, for the next y months')

A semi-formal problem definition is as follows:

## Semi-formal Problem 1

## Given

- -k risk-assessing oracles
- -historical data ( tuples of the form: [order-risk, order-price, importanceweight, fraud-flag] )
- -the oracle-weights w = ( w 1 , . . . , w k )

## To meet

- -the immediate business goal/constraint, and
- -to be prepared for unpredictable (or unplanned) business constraints in the near future.

As we describe later, we break the problems into four sub-problems, and we describe how we solve each. Figure 1 illustrates FraudFox savings (green vertical arrow) post deployment (vertical black dashed line). The blue dashed line indicates fraud losses without dynamically blending a subset of fraud signals, while the orange solid line represents losses when performing this dynamic blending. Lower is better, and FraudFox consistently achieves visible loss reduction.

In short, our contributions are the following:

- Automatic : FraudFox adapts to new elements of ground truth, without human intervention (see Theorem 1)
- Principled : we derive from first principles an optimal decision surface (see Lemma 4)
- Scalable : FraudFox is linear in the input size, and quadratic on the (small) number of oracles. It takes minutes to train on a stock machine, and fractions of a second to make decisions
- Effective/Deployed : Already in production, FraudFox has visible benefits (see Figure 1)

The paper is organized in the usual way: survey, proposed solutions, experiments, and conclusions.

## 2 Literature Survey

Kalman filters To the best of our knowledge, there are few examples of Kalman Filters used in adversarial modeling. Notable work includes Park et. al Park and Sahai [2013] whom consider a control theory setting that involved a separated observer of a system and its controller. In this setting the adversary has the ability to non-randomly erase information transmitted by the observer to the controller. Their approach to counteracting the negative impacts of the adversary is based on non-uniform sampling of the observed system. This is not unlike our approach, where we non-uniformly weight the observation data based on a noisy signal from the adversary. Another example comes from Chang et al. Chang et al. [2018] where an ensemble method is proposed. The adversarial nature of the system is modeled using a 'secure estimator' that accounts for the noise being

## Find

introduced by the adversary not being zero mean i.i.d. Gaussian process noise. This secure estimator is then integrated into the canonical update equations of the KF.

Additionally, our proposal overlaps with a few other areas of machine learning which will be discussed in the rest of the section. The canonical Kalman Filter Kalman [1960] is a dynamic signal processor that was initially developed in the 60's. It has long been widely applied to signal processing, autonomous driving, target tracking and so on Azuma and Bishop [1994]. Later, Extended Kalman Filter (Sorenson [1985],Jazwinski [2007], Niranjan [1999], Meinhold and Singpurwalla [1983]) and Unscented Kalman Filter Julier and Uhlmann [2004] were proposed to solve a broader set of non-linear problems. For the Extended Kalman Filter, our work is similar to MacKay MacKay [1992] and Penny et al. Penny and Roberts [1999] where we make use of an approximation of the posterior from the former and also propose a method to deal with non-stationarity as in the later. However, their proposals do not consider applying the Kalman Filter to adversarial problems.

Online learning The other key component of our proposal is online learning. Different online learning techniques have been proposed for linear (Zhang [2004], Chen and Roussopoulos [1994]) and non-linear (Lakshminarayanan et al. [2014], Grnarova et al. [2018]) models, which are primarily designed to accelerate computation time and resolve scalability limitations. In the presence of adversarial attacks, online learning becomes more powerful due to its advantages in incorporating emerging data patterns in a more efficient and effective fashion, such as Quanrud and Khashabi [2015] and the adversarial classification method from Dalvi et al. [2004] (referred to as AC-method in table 1). However, no universal solution to these types of problems has been established due to the nature of adversaries.

Ensemble of classifiers Ensemble learning is a popular technique used to overcome individual shortcomings of one model or another. Most popular uses of ensembles come from boosting Freund et al. [1996] and bootstrap-aggregation Breiman [2001] methods, as well as in a host of application studies Krawczyk et al. [2017]. Research in ensemble learning is still evolving, with some recent work focused on information extraction Ye et al. [2018], Lucchese et al. [2017] or interpretability Tolomei et al. [2017] of these ensembles. While other work focuses on classification improvement Narassiguin et al. [2017] and optimal policies for combining classifiers Cerqueira et al. [2018]. This includes specific applications, such as protein function prediction Yu et al. [2012], profit estimation An et al. [2016],Xu and Sharma [2017] and time-series forecasting Saadallah et al. [2019]Cerqueira et al. [2017]. Examples, of the use of Kalman Filters for ensemble learning include Peel [2008] and Baraldi et al. [2012], however neither application concerns adversarial or non-stationary environments. An example of ensemble learning in non-stationary environments includes Muhlbaier and Polikar [2007] where a simple weighted-majority vote is used to combine signals. However, the weights themselves are not learned in a principled way but are simply arbitrary weighted averages of the individual classifier performance over some time.

However, none of the above methods provides a full solution to Problem 1 in the introduction. The qualitative comparison is in Table 1

Table 1: FraudFox matches all specs , while competitors miss one or more of the features.

<!-- image -->

## 3 Overview of proposed solution

Wepropose to break our high-level problems, into the following four sub-problems. The first two are for the adaptation to fraudsters (with adversarial behavior); the last two are for the adaptation to changing of business constraints.

1. P1 - Fraud Adaptation: find how to automatically update the weights of the k classifiers, given new ground truth (see Problem 1 page 6). Notice that we can give importance weights to each labeled order, according to its recency, or other criteria (see page 7)
2. P2 - Anti-Gaming: given the non-stationary and adversarial environment, determine the importance weights for new ground truth orders (see Problem 1 page 6)
3. P3 - Decision Surface: find an optimal decision surface for passing or investigating orders, given the various costs and benefits of making a decision (see page 10)

4. P4 - Business Adaptation: Given the business constraints and need for quick adaption to constraint changes, find the best set (i.e., Pareto optimal) of classifier weights from Problem 1. See Problem 4, page 11.

Next, we show how to solve the four sub-problems.

## 4 Proposed FraudFox -F, for Fraud Adaptation

Here we focus on the sub-problem Fraud Adaptation. Table 2 lists the symbols and their definitions. The exact definition is as follows

Table 2: Symbols and definitions

| Symbols   | Definitions                                     |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------|
| k         | count of Oracles                                |
| w t       | weights of the Oracles (k x 1 vector) at time t |
| Σ t       | covariance matrix of the Oracles (k x k matrix) |
| K t       | Kalman Gain                                     |
| H t       | Observation matrix (Eq 6)                       |
| β         | hyper-parameter of weighting policy (Eq 4)      |
| α         | hyper-parameter of weighting policy (Eq 4)      |
| D i       | order i 's distance to decision surface (eq 4)  |
| z         | binary class label                              |
| y         | model output                                    |
| s 2 t     | variance of the activation function             |

## Problem 1 (Fraud Adaptation)

Given

: a new order with class label

Update

: the weight of each classifier ( w 1 , ... w k )

to optimize

: classification accuracy

Our approach is based on taking a Bayesian perspective of canonical Logistic Regression of the form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the predicted class label Z t is generated using the relationship defined in equation 1 and g ( a t ) is the logistic function and a t is the activation at time t . The activation being the linear combination of the model inputs ( x ) and the weights ( w ) of the model.

With the above setting, and with a new element of ground truth coming in (an order with vector x t , and fraud/honest flag y t ), the update equations for the weights of the 'oracles' ˆ w = [ w 1 , ..., w k ] are given by the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) equations:

## Lemma 1 (EKF update)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Special case of the upcoming Theorem 1, see Lemma 2.

■

## 5 Proposed FraudFox -I for Anti-Gaming

Here we focus on the sub-problem of updating a classifier in a non-stationary and adversarial environment. The EKF facilities the incremental learning component, however equally important, is how much influence is awarded to new observations. The fraud environment is highly non-stationary and providing more weight to new observations is similar to gradually forgetting older ones. When receiving new fraud orders we know that all observations are not equally useful. Some of the orders are not actually fraud or the fraud pattern has already subsided. Given the large volume of new observations each day, it is impossible to manually make these decisions.

Formally, the problem we propose and solve, is the following:

## Problem 2 (Anti-Gaming)

## Given :

- -Several labeled orders ( d -dim vectors) generated from a non-stationary and adversarial environment,
- -and the decision surface (from problem 3, see section 7)

Find : an appropriate weight for each order

To : maximize classification accuracy on the recent time-period

In this section we propose two approaches to assign importance weights. Firstly, we propose a novel weighting schema which considers fraudsters attempting to game the system (adversarial). Secondly, we derive novel update equations for the Kalman Filter that accommodate non-stationary observations.

## 5.1 Adversarial Adaptation

Building on the idea of an adversarial domain, it is observed that those looking to commit fraud will 'poke' around a system looking for holes. In doing so, a typical fraud pattern can emerge that exists close to a decision surface of the fraud system. Figure 2 illustrates the motivation behind our Eq. 4: Fraudsters will tend to 'fly below the horizon', flocking below our decision surface. Our proposed approach will block them. A decision surface is essentially a rule which determines when an order is passed or investigated. We assume that the weight is a function of the distance from the decision surface, where observations closer to the decision surface receive more weight. An optimal weight is difficult to know a priori. Thus, we model this weight-to-distance relationship based on an exponential distribution. The weight ( γ ) of observation i is given as:

f Pass

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α and β act as hyper-parameters of the model. A very practical aspect of the EKF is that it is parameter-less. However, this can lead to a lack of flexibility and so the weighting policy provides some opportunities to adapt the model. In a following section (6), we describe the creation of a decision surface from a cost-benefit analysis perspective, where standard approaches to calculate the distance a point, i , to a curve can be used for D i .

Fig. 2: Illustration of Decision Surface and Adversarial Behavior. In the (fraud-score vs. order value) plot, when we fix the decision surface (blue curve), fraudulent orders (red crosses) will probably flock just below it. FraudFox -I is blocking exactly this behavior.

<!-- image -->

The values of ( α &amp; β ) are arbitrary, however, since training is very efficient we don't need to choose them a priori but can perform a simple grid search to generate a set of possible updates to the model.

## 5.2 Non-stationary Adaptation

In a non-stationary environment there is cause to gradually forget previously learned patterns. With online learning, this is achieved with a forgetting function that diminishes model parameters overtime. With respect to FraudFox , the 'idea' of forgetting can be interpreted as an increase in the covariance matrix

Σ , as a larger covariance entails more uncertainty in the model and thus less reliance of the past observations. When there is more uncertainty in the prior, the model updates will place more weight on the latest observations. An EKF model can be extended to non-stationary environments by simply including a term q t in the update equations, where q t I is isotropic covariance matrix describing the impact of the state noise on the current estimate of variance in the various priors. However, we see two problems with this approach: (1) It is difficult to accurately estimate the state-noise and (2) summarize it in q t .

Rather than estimating the state noise, we approach the problem by estimating a weight (a function of time since the order was placed) to be applied to the current observation and thus the Kalman gain update. The full derivation of the equations below is included in the supplementary material. Formally, we consider a weight a to be applied to the current Kalman Gain for purpose of a model update. Applying this weight requires the following:

Theorem 1 (EKF with forgetting). With forgetting parameter of a , the update equations are:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w ∗ t = µ ∗ t (see equation 19 in proof A page 19) and H t is the derivative of the logit function. In our application H t is a scalar, where:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

■

Proof 1 See Appendix A

The value of a can be chosen dynamically, and when a is chosen to be &gt; 2 the covariance matrix increases in value with the update and thus forgets previous observations and relies more heavily on the current data point.

Lemma 2 For a =1, i.e., no forgetting, Eq. (5-6) become Eq. (2-3)

Proof 2 Recovering equations 5-6 is achieved from straightforward substitution and reducing the update equations to their compact from, taking advantage of the scalar output. ■

In support of our argument that the added weight to new observations increases the uncertainty in the covariance matrix we provide the following proof. Where we show that the new update in equation 6 guarantees that the resulting Σ t is always larger then or equal to the update from equation 3.

Lemma 3 For a given new observation x t with label z t , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof 3 See Appendix B

■

## 6 Proposed FraudFox -D for Decision Surface

In this section we derive the optimal decision surface for taking actions on orders, a necessity for our adversarial importance weighting. For the purpose of this discussion, we simplify the actual system, and we assume that we need to choose between only two options, namely to pass, or to investigate. Then, the problem is informally defined as follows:

- -given several orders, and their (price, score) for each,
- -decide which ones are best to pass (vs. investigate) Formally, we have

## Problem 3 (Decision Surface)

Given :

- -the (dollar) cost of a 'false alarm', false dismissal, and investigation cost
- -and a specific order with suspiciousness score s and value (i.e., selling price) v

Find the best decision we should do (accept vs. investigate), and expected value of this order, under our best decision.

In effect, we have to combine the price v and the score s (= probability of being fraudulent), into a function F ( s, u ) to make our decision - if F () is below a threshold θ , we should accept the transaction as 'honest'; otherwise we should investigate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

How should we choose the blending function F (), and the threshold θ ? The straightforward (but wrong) answer, is to estimate the expected value: F () = v ∗ s : if the price v is low, and the probability of fraud s is also low, then pass. However, this is wrong: An expensive item will almost always get investigated, potentially delaying a high-dollar order from a legitimate customer.

The solution we propose is to derive the result with a cost-benefit analysis, from fi rst principles . Thus, we propose to also take into account

- -c : the $ cost of the human investigation
- -m : the profit margin (say, m =0.1, for 10% profit margin)
- -f : the cost of friction ( $ amount reduction in life-time value or a coupon for a falsely investigated customer)
- -d : the loss, from a false dismissal (usually d = 1 -m but can also be impacted by external events, i.e. credit card declined by bank) Figure 3 illustrates our setting

Let s H,max be the maximum fraud-score we should tolerate, and still 'pass' this order. Then, we can show that the resulting decision surface is a hyperbola (See illustration in Figure 2). Next, we prove this Lemma:

Lemma 4 (Hyperbolic decision surface) The decision surface is a hyperbola. Specifically, with the parameters as described above, the order (price v , prob. fraud s ) should be passed (ie., treated as 'honest'):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig. 3: Cost Benefit Analysis. Profit, for each of the four cases.

| guess Reality   | Honest (1-   | s ) Fraud (   |
|-----------------|--------------|---------------|
| Honest          | v ∗ m        | - v ∗ d       |
| Fraud           | - c - f      | - c           |

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The idea is to find the expected profit for each of our decision, and pick the highest. Thus if we choose 'H' (honest), the expected profit p h is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That is, with probability s we allow a fraudulent order, and we lose its value ( -v ∗ d ); and with probability (1s ) we correctly allow the order, for a profit of v ∗ m . Similarly, the expected profit p f when we decide 'fraud' is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

thus, we should decide to 'pass' (ie., 'honest'), if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

solving the inequality for s , we complete the proof. See Appendix C for the complete derivation. ■

Notice that the resulting curve is a hyperbola in the ( s, v ) plane.

We approximate this hyperbola as piece-wise linear to simplify the implementation in the production system. Among the many ways to fit our curve we chose a multi-objective meta-heuristic algorithm based on PSO Butler and Kazakov [2012] due to a cheap objective function to compute and having two equally important objectives (# investigated orders and fraud $ 's captured) to satisfy.

## 7 Proposed FraudFox -B for Business Adaptation

Problem 4 (Business Adaptation) Given :

- -the m constraints of the business (like number of available human investigators)
- -and the time-varying component of their thresholds

Find an optimal set of solutions that satisfy the various thresholds of the m business constraints.

We require a Pareto optimal set of solutions in business metric (BM) space. A solution on the Pareto frontier requires that one metric cannot be improved without the deterioration of another. Formally the Pareto set of solutions, P(Y), and a function, f , that maps a candidate FraudFox -F model into BM space:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X is a set of n dimensional weight vectors found with the FraudFox -F represented in the space R n , and Y is the set of vectors in R m , our m dimensional BM space, such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A point y ∗ in R m strictly dominates y ′ , represented as y ∗ ≺ y ′ , when y ∗ outperforms y ′ in all m dimensions. In figure 2 (panel B) a non-dominated solution is shown as a point that it's NE quadrant (shown in light blue) is empty. Thus, the Pareto set is represented as:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In our setting, the BM space can be represented as: (1) fraud dollars captured per investigation and (2) count of investigations performed. The set of solutions is generated by using a grid search of the hyper-parameters ( α and β ) from equation 4, along with a varying ratio of positive-to-negative examples. In figure 4 we plot model performance results after updating using the grid search represented in BM space, where the practitioner can choose a model that satisfies the current constraints. The models on the Pareto front in figure 4 are indicated with a green 'X', dominated solutions are indicated with a red square.

fraud($) per investigation Illustration of Pareto Front X-

# of investigations

Fig. 4: Business Adaptation and Pareto Front. FraudFox precomputes the Pareto front, in preparation of changes in business requirements. Scatter plot of model performance in business metric space (# of investigations, vs $ fraud captured per investigation). Every point is a possible parameter choice of FraudFox . Points with empty light blue NE quadrants are non-dominating and thus form the Pareto front (green 'x' points).

<!-- image -->

## 8 Results

FraudFox has been implemented within a larger, live fraud prevention system. In Figure 1 (page 2) we provided a comparison (data points were smoothed via a moving average) of the missed fraud within the sub-system FraudFox was employed in, with or without it. With the introduction of FraudFox (dashedblack vertical line), there is a visible reduction in fraud losses.

Sanity-check: Adapting to shock We also present a synthetic example of a onetime change, see Figure 5. In this case, FraudFox adapts to the change, as expected. In more detail, figure 5 shows a synthetic dataset with k =2 oracles, one near-perfect and the other near-random (and thus useless). At time t =30, there is a 'shock': the performance of the two oracles swapped. Notice that the prediction loss surged immediately as the pattern changed. We show three different strategies: (1) no-adaptation : baseline - we keep the original model ( w ), unchanged; (2) FraudFox (without exponential forgetting - section 4; and (3) FraudFox -exp, with exponential forgetting of the older data points -subsection 5.2. The results in the Figure are exactly as expected: the loss jumps for all methods at the moment of the 'shock', but with no-adaptation , the loss stays high as expected; while both versions of FraudFox adapt eventually, with the exponentially-forgetting one, adapting faster.

1.0

0.8

0.6 -

0.4 -

0.2-

11

moment of change

60

time

Fig. 5: FraudFox Adapts: Synthetic Example. As expected, both our versions (equal-weights, in 'green' and exponentially-decaying weights, in 'red') responds to a change/shock at t =30, and eventually recover from the shock. Without adaptation ('blue'), the behavior suffers.

<!-- image -->

80

original

equal weight

exp weight

100

120

## 9 Conclusions

In this work we have proposed a novel method ( FraudFox ) that solves all the subproblems listed in the introduction (see page 1). FraudFox automatically adapts to a dynamic environment and provides Pareto optimal alternatives to timevarying business constraints. Finally, FraudFox is deployed in production and provides a solution, which is more resilient to abrupt changes in fraud behavior, while better balancing fraud losses and investigation costs.

In short, our main contributions are the following:

- Automatic : FraudFox adapts to both adversarial and non-stationary observations (See Theorem 1 and Section 7)
- Principled : we derived from first principles an optimal decision surface from investigating orders based on a cost-benefit framework (see Lemma 4)
- Scalable : FraudFox is linear on the input size for parameter updates, and takes below a second, for decisions on the order-level.
- Effective/Deployed : FraudFox is already in production, with visible benefits.

Acknowlegements For her valuable contributions to the project we would like to thank Mina Loghavi.

## Bibliography

- Bo An, Haipeng Chen, Noseong Park, and VS Subrahmanian. Map: Frequencybased maximization of airline profits based on an ensemble forecasting approach. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 421-430, 2016.
- Ronald Azuma and Gary Bishop. Improving static and dynamic registration in an optical see-through hmd. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , SIGGRAPH '94, pages 197-204, New York, NY, USA, 1994. ACM.
- Piero Baraldi, Francesca Mangili, and Enrico Zio. A kalman filter-based ensemble approach with application to turbine creep prognostics. IEEE Transactions on Reliability , 61(4):966-977, 2012.
- Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning , 45(1):5-32, 2001.
- Matthew Butler and Dimitar Kazakov. A learning adaptive bollinger band system. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering &amp; Economics (CIFEr) , pages 1-8. IEEE, 2012.
- V´ ıtor Cerqueira, Lu´ ıs Torgo, F´ abio Pinto, and Carlos Soares. Arbitrated ensemble for time series forecasting. In Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases , pages 478-494. Springer, 2017.
- Vitor Cerqueira, Fabio Pinto, Luis Torgo, Carlos Soares, and Nuno Moniz. Constructive aggregation and its application to forecasting with dynamic ensembles. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 620-636. Springer, 2018.
- Young Hwan Chang, Qie Hu, and Claire J Tomlin. Secure estimation based kalman filter for cyber-physical systems against sensor attacks. Automatica , 95:399-412, 2018.
- Chungmin Melvin Chen and Nick Roussopoulos. Adaptive selectivity estimation using query feedback. Technical report, Univ. of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, College Park, MD, USA, 1994.
- Nilesh Dalvi, Pedro Domingos, Mausam, Sumit Sanghai, and Deepak Verma. Adversarial classification. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD '04, pages 99-108, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM. ISBN 1-58113-888-1.
- Yoav Freund, Robert E Schapire, et al. Experiments with a new boosting algorithm. In icml , volume 96, pages 148-156. Citeseer, 1996.
- Paulina Grnarova, Kfir Y Levy, Aurelien Lucchi, Thomas Hofmann, and Andreas Krause. An online learning approach to generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
- A.H. Jazwinski. Stochastic Processes and Filtering Theory . Dover Books on Electrical Engineering Series. Dover Publications, 2007. ISBN 9780486462745. URL https://books . google . com/books?id=4AqL3vE2J-sC .

- S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann. Unscented filtering and nonlinear estimation. Proceedings of the IEEE , 92(3):401-422, March 2004.
2. Rudolph Emil Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Journal of basic Engineering , 82(1):35-45, 1960.
3. Bartosz Krawczyk, Leandro L Minku, Jo˜ ao Gama, Jerzy Stefanowski, and Michaglyph[suppress] l Wo´ zniak. Ensemble learning for data stream analysis: A survey. Information Fusion , 37:132-156, 2017.
4. Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Daniel M. Roy, and Yee Whye Teh. Mondrian forests: Efficient online random forests. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2 , NIPS'14, pages 3140-3148, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014. MIT Press.
5. Claudio Lucchese, Franco Maria Nardini, Salvatore Orlando, Raffaele Perego, Nicola Tonellotto, and Rossano Venturini. Quickscorer: Efficient traversal of large ensembles of decision trees. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 383-387. Springer, 2017.
6. David JC MacKay. The evidence framework applied to classification networks. Neural computation , 4(5):720-736, 1992.
7. Richard J Meinhold and Nozer D Singpurwalla. Understanding the kalman filter. The American Statistician , 37(2):123-127, 1983.
8. Michael D Muhlbaier and Robi Polikar. An ensemble approach for incremental learning in nonstationary environments. In International workshop on multiple classifier systems , pages 490-500. Springer, 2007.
9. Anil Narassiguin, Haytham Elghazel, and Alex Aussem. Dynamic ensemble selection with probabilistic classifier chains. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 169-186. Springer, 2017.
10. Mahesan Niranjan. Sequential bayesian computation of logistic regression models. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1999. Proceedings., 1999 IEEE International Conference on , volume 2, pages 1065-1068. IEEE, 1999.
11. Se Yong Park and Anant Sahai. Intermittent kalman filtering with adversarial erasures: Eigenvalue cycles again. In 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , pages 6073-6078. IEEE, 2013.
12. Leto Peel. Data driven prognostics using a kalman filter ensemble of neural network models. In 2008 International Conference on Prognostics and Health Management , pages 1-6. IEEE, 2008.
13. William D Penny and Stephen J Roberts. Dynamic logistic regression. In Neural Networks, 1999. IJCNN'99. International Joint Conference on , volume 3, pages 1562-1567. IEEE, 1999.
14. Kent Quanrud and Daniel Khashabi. Online learning with adversarial delays. In C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28 , pages 12701278. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.

- Amal Saadallah, Florian Priebe, and Katharina Morik. A drift-based dynamic ensemble members selection using clustering for time series forecasting. In Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases , pages 1-16. Springer, 2019.
- H.W. Sorenson. Kalman Filtering: Theory and Application . IEEE Press selected reprint series. IEEE Press, 1985. ISBN 9780879421915. URL https: //books . google . com/books?id=2pgeAQAAIAAJ .
- Gabriele Tolomei, Fabrizio Silvestri, Andrew Haines, and Mounia Lalmas. Interpretable predictions of tree-based ensembles via actionable feature tweaking. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 465-474, 2017.
- Qiuping Xu and Vikas Sharma. Ensemble sales forecasting study in semiconductor industry. In Industrial Conference on Data Mining , pages 31-44. Springer, 2017.
- Ting Ye, Hucheng Zhou, Will Y Zou, Bin Gao, and Ruofei Zhang. Rapidscorer: fast tree ensemble evaluation by maximizing compactness in data level parallelization. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &amp; Data Mining , pages 941-950, 2018.
- Guoxian Yu, Carlotta Domeniconi, Huzefa Rangwala, Guoji Zhang, and Zhiwen Yu. Transductive multi-label ensemble classification for protein function prediction. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 1077-1085, 2012.
- Tong Zhang. Solving large linear prediction problems using stochastic gradient descent algorithms. In Proceedings of the Twenty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML '04, pages 116-, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM. ISBN 1-58113-838-5.

## A Appendix: Proof of Exponential Forgetting Formulae

Here we give the proof of Theorem 1 on page 9. We repeat the theorem, for convenience.

Theorem 1[EKF with forgetting] With forgetting parameter of a , the update equations are:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof Let's first set up some notations.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The underlying assumption is E ( ϵ t ) = 0 , E ( ν t ) = 0 , and E ( ϵ T t ν t ) = 0. Furthermore, we denote var ( ϵ t ) = Q t and var ( ν t ) = R t .

From regular EKF, we know that the update function of the mean is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K t is called Kalman Gain with K t = Σ ∗ t -1 H t ( H t Σ ∗ t -1 H T t + R t ) -1 , H t is the partial derivative of h ( w t , x t ) w.r.t. w t , and y t = h ( µ t -1 , x t ).

Now, with the new proposed mean update function:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we have the new error term as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Σ ∗ t -1 = Σ t -1 + Q t .

We use the same K t as in the regular EKF and adapt that into the above equation to get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that, K t ( H t Σ ∗ t -1 H T t + R t ) = Σ ∗ t -1 H t . Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we let Q → 0, then Σ ∗ t -1 → Σ t -1 and we have Σ t = Σ t -1 + a ( a -2) K t H t Σ t -1 . ■

## B Appendix: Proof of Larger Covariance Matrix

In support of our argument that the added weight to new observations increases the uncertainty in the covariance matrix we provide the following proof. Where we show that the new update in equation 6 guarantees that the resulting Σ t is always larger then or equal the update from equation 3.

Lemma 3[Increase in Covariance Matrix]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equality above holds when a = 1. Note, the right-hand side is the covariance update of the original EKF (Extended Kalman Filter). To see this,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since K t H t Σ t -1 is positive definite and symmetric, we can multiply the above by ( K t H t Σ t -1 ) -1 and the formula is reduced to ( a -1) 2 ≥ 0, where the equality holds when a=1.

More rigorously, we can prove the invertibility in the following: Let M= K t H t Σ t -1 . Since M is symmetric, we decompose M as QDQ T . Here, D is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues of M and Q is an orthogonal matrix, where rows of Q are eigenvectors of M . Hence, equation 20 is equal to ( a -1) 2 QDQ T .

Since Q is by definition invertible, we can multiply Q T to the left and ( Q T ) -1 to the right and reduce it further to ( a -1) 2 D .

Now D contains the eigenvalues from a symmetric covariance matrix and therefore all eigenvalues are ≥ 0, thus ( a -1) 2 D&gt; 0 for any a&gt; 1. The canonical form with a =1 will always lead to min variance for a given update. ■

## C Appendix: Proof of Optimal Decision Surface for Guessing Fraud

Here we provide the full proof of Lemma 4 on page 10. We repeat the lemma, for convenience, as well as the definitions:

- -c : the $ cost of the human investigation
- -m : the profit margin (say, m =0.1, for 10% profit margin)
- -f : the cost of friction ( $ amount reduction in life-time value or a coupon for a falsely investigated customer)
- -d : the loss, from a false dismissal (usually d = 1 -m but can also be impacted by external events, i.e. credit card declined by bank)

Lemma 4 [Optimal Decision Surface] The decision surface is a hyperbola . Specifically, with the parameters as described above, the order (price v , prob. fraud s ) should be passed (ie., treated as 'honest'):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

## Proof

The idea is to find the expected profit for each of our decision, and pick the highest. Thus if we choose 'H' (honest), the expected profit p h is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That is, with probability s we allow a fraudulent order, and we lose its value ( -v ∗ d ); and with probability (1s ) we correctly allow the order, for a profit of v ∗ m . Similarly, the expected profit p f when we decide 'fraud' is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we should decide to 'pass' (ie., 'honest'), if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we solve for the inequality, where expanding out both sides we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Solving for s , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

And with one final rearrangement

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we arrive at equation 21.

■